In this chapter, you will learn about the different types of Casualty insurance policies, including Personal Automotive policies, Personal Liability policies, and Umbrella and Excess Liability policies. By the end of this chapter, you should be able to explain the different types of coverages and how the policies differ from one another.

Terms to Know
Actual cash value — method of valuation that reinforces the principle of indemnity because it recognizes the reduction of value of property as it ages and becomes subject to wear and tear
Bailee — someone who is entrusted with possession of another person's property but has no ownership of it (e.g., a service station having a damaged vehicle for repairs)
Financial responsibility — proof that one can pay for damages caused, often fulfilled by purchasing insurance
Inception — the date at which the insurance policy goes into effect
Insolvent — unable to meet financial obligations
Lessor — a person granting a lease of a motor vehicle
Private passenger vehicle — an automobile used for private needs rather than for business uses
SIR — self-insured retention; a deductible that must be paid by an insured in order to access the umbrella policy's funds when the insured's underlying coverage will not cover the loss
Statute — written law passed by a legislative body


Chapter 4. Types of Casualty Policies
0% Completed
Chapter 4. Types of Casualty Policies

A. Automotive: Personal Auto

Automotive: Personal Auto
1. General Form Structure
The personal auto policy (PAP) is an insurance policy for the owners of private passenger vehicles. The policy combines physical damage insurance on the automobile with liability insurance for claims from use of the auto. The PAP contains several parts, each describing specific coverage as follows:  

Part A – Liability Coverage;
Part B – Medical Payments Coverage;
Part C – Uninsured Motorist Coverage;
Part D – Coverage for Damage to Your Auto;
Part E – Duties After an Accident or Loss; and
Part F – General Provisions.
Most of the PAP parts contain the insuring agreement, exclusions, and limits of liability sections.

The ownership or operation of an auto involves three types of potential loss, and PAP must provide protection for these losses under diverse circumstances:

Legal liability (for injuries and/or property damage to others);
Injury to the insured or members of the insured's family; and
Damage to or loss of the auto itself.
2. Definitions
The Definitions section of the personal auto policy (also known as a PAP) is located on the first page of the policy and defines various terms used throughout the policy. Some of the more important terms are listed below.

Bodily injury means bodily harm, sickness or disease, including death that results from the injury.

Property damage means physical injury, destruction or loss of use of tangible property.

The terms you and your used throughout the personal auto policy (PAP) refer to

The named insured shown in the Declarations; and
The spouse of the named insured, if a resident of the same household. If the spouse ceases to be a resident of the same household during the policy period or prior to the inception of the policy, the spouse will only be considered under the definition of you and your until the earlier of:
The end of 90 days following the spouse's change of residency;
The effective date of another policy listing the spouse as a named insured; or
The end of the policy period.
A family member is a person related by blood, marriage, or adoption who is a resident of the household. This includes ward or foster children.

Your covered auto includes

Any vehicle shown in the declarations;
A newly acquired auto;
Any trailer owned; or
Any auto or trailer not owned by the insured but used as a temporary substitute for a vehicle described above which is out of normal use because of its breakdown, repair, servicing, loss or destruction.
Know that any person qualifies as an insured while using a covered auto, as defined in Part A - Liability Coverage section of a personal auto policy.

A trailer means a vehicle designed to be pulled by a private passenger auto, pickup or van, or farm wagons and implements while towed by any of the above vehicle types.

A newly acquired auto is any of the following types of vehicles that are acquired by the insured during the policy period:

A private passenger auto;
A pickup or van, for which no other insurance policy provides coverage, that:
Has a gross vehicle weight of less than 10,000 lbs. (GVW is the maximum recommended weight including the vehicle, fuel and fluids, passengers, and all cargo);
Is not used for the delivery or transportation of goods and materials unless such use is incidental to a business of installing, maintaining, or repairing furnishings or equipment; or
Is not used for farming or ranching.
Collision is the upset or impact of a covered vehicle or nonowned auto with another vehicle or object.

Other-than-collision (previously called comprehensive) includes losses caused by the following:

Missiles or falling objects;
Fire;
Theft or larceny;
Explosion or earthquake;
Windstorm;
Hail, water, or flood;
Vandalism or malicious mischief;
Riot or civil commotion;
Contact with birds or animals; and
Breakage of glass.
Note that other-than-collision is a property insurance coverage.

Occupying means in, upon, getting in, on, out of, or off a vehicle.

Transportation network platform (TNP) means an online-enabled application or digital network used to connect passengers with drivers using vehicles for the purpose of providing prearranged transportation services for compensation.


Coverage for a newly acquired auto is provided as follows:

For liability, medical payments, and uninsured motorist coverages, a newly acquired auto will have the broadest coverage offered on any vehicle shown on the declarations. However, for this coverage to apply, the named insured must notify the insurer within 14 days after becoming the vehicle owner.

Collision Coverage and/or Other Than Collision Coverage for a newly acquired auto begins on the date the insured becomes the owner. For this coverage to apply, the insured must ask the company to insure the vehicle within:

14 days of becoming the owner if the Declarations indicates that Collision and/or Other Than Collision Coverage applies to at least one auto. In this case, the newly acquired auto will have the broadest coverage now provided for any auto shown in the Declarations.
4 days of becoming the owner if the Declarations does NOT indicate that Collision and/or Other Than Collision Coverage applies to at least one auto. If the named insured complies with the 4-day requirement and a loss occurred before the insured asked to insure the newly acquired auto, a $500 deductible will apply. 
3. Types of Autos
Owned
Owned autos are those eligible vehicles titled by the insured or acquired during the policy period.

Nonowned
Nonowned autos are any private passenger auto, pickup, van, or trailer operated by or in the custody of the named insured or a family member, but that are not titled by or furnished for the regular use of the insured.

Hired
Hired autos include those that are leased, hired, rented, or borrowed from someone other than an employee or partner.

The classes hired automobile and nonowned automobile are mutually exclusive, and the distinction between the two often is misunderstood. Hired automobiles include those that are leased, hired, rented, or borrowed, excluding autos that are owned by employees. Autos leased, hired, rented, or borrowed from employees are considered nonowned automobiles. Thus, the distinction between a hired and nonowned auto does not depend on whether payment is made for the use of the auto, but rather on whether it is owned by an employee. (This somewhat artificial distinction exists primarily for the purpose of rating and premium determination.)

Temporary Substitute
The personal auto policy provides coverage for any auto or trailer not owned by an insured while used as a temporary substitute for any other vehicle described in the policy that is out of normal use because of breakdown, repair, servicing, loss, or destruction.

4. Part A: Liability
Insuring Agreement
Liability coverage protects the insured against loss arising from legal liability when an automobile that the insured owns, operates, or maintains is involved in an accident. Under liability coverage, the policy will pay for the following:

Bodily injury and property damage due to an accident for which the insured is legally responsible;
Defense costs as long as the policy covers a particular loss (these costs are paid in addition to the policy limits); and
Costs for settling or defending the insured as deemed appropriate (these costs end when the limits of insurance are exhausted).
Who is an Insured
An insured is the person named in an insurance policy that is protected under the contract and to whom the insurer pays benefits or provides services.

Under Part A – Liability, the insured is defined as:

The insured or any family member for the ownership, maintenance, or use of any auto or trailer;
Any person using an insured's covered auto with permission;
For an insured's covered auto, any person, or organization (this is only with respect to legal responsibility for acts or omissions of a person for whom coverage is afforded under liability); and
For any auto or trailer other than the insured's covered auto, any other person, or organization, but only with respect to legal responsibility for acts or omissions of the insured or a family member for whom coverage is afforded under liability. This provision applies if the person or organization does not own or hire the auto or trailer.
Supplementary Payments
Under the supplementary payments provision, the insurer promises to pay certain other costs on behalf of an insured:

Up to $250 for the cost of bail bonds required of the insured because of a covered loss;
Premiums on appeal bonds and bonds to release attachments in suits covered under the policy;
Interest on a judgment after the judgment has been entered;
Up to $200 per day for loss of earnings for assisting in legal proceedings (e.g., attendance at hearings or trials); and
Other reasonable expenses incurred at the request of the insurer.
Amounts payable under the supplementary payments provision are payable in addition to the liability limit.

Exclusions
The following exclusions apply to the liability coverage provided for certain persons and vehicles in the PAP:

Intentional injury or damage;
Damage to property owned or being transported by a covered person;
Damage to property rented, used, or in the care of a covered person, except a home or private garage;
Bodily injury to an employee during the course of employment, except domestic employees not required to be covered by workers compensation;
Use of a vehicle as a public or livery conveyance, except carpools or vehicles used for volunteer or charitable purposes;
Use of a vehicle by an insurer who is logged into a transportation network platform as a driver, whether or not a passenger is occupying the vehicle;
Damage caused by any person while engaged in the business of selling, repairing, servicing, storing, or parking vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways (note that this exclusion does not apply to the ownership, maintenance or use of your covered auto by the insured, any family member, or any partner, agent or employee of the insured or any family member);
Use of commercial-type vehicles in any business;
Persons using a covered auto without permission;
Persons insured under a nuclear energy policy, including persons that would have been insured except for the exhaustion of the policy limits;
The ownership, maintenance, or use of:
Any motorized vehicle with fewer than 4 wheels;
Any vehicle designed mainly for use off public roads;
Any other vehicle owned or available for regular use by the insured, other than a covered auto;
Any vehicle owned by or furnished for regular use by a family member, other than a covered auto; the named insured is covered while maintaining or occupying such a vehicle;
Any vehicle located inside a racing facility for the purpose of racing or speed contest, or driver skill training; and
Used or designed for flight.
Limits of Liability
Under a personal auto policy, the insured may choose between 2 types of liability limits: split and combined single.

Split limit coverage uses 3 dollar amounts. In the event of an automobile accident, these numbers specify the maximum amount the policy will pay for

Bodily injury for each person involved;
Bodily injury for the entire accident (regardless of the total number of persons involved); and
Property damage.
Note: split limits are always expressed in this order.

For example, policy limits expressed as 25/50/25 would provide $25,000 coverage for bodily injury per person, with a maximum of $50,000 for all bodily injuries, and $25,000 property damage coverage per accident.

By contrast, combined single coverage uses one dollar amount, indicating the maximum coverage for all losses – regardless of the number of people involved or the amount of property damaged.

When the policy is used to satisfy any financial responsibility requirements, the policy will comply with the law to the extent required.



5. Part B: Medical Payments
Insuring Agreement
Medical payments coverage pays reasonable expenses associated with necessary medical and funeral expenses caused by an accident and sustained by an insured. Expenses and services must be rendered within 3 years of the accident.

Who is an Insured
Insured is defined under Part B – Medical Payments as

The named insured ("you") or any family member while occupying a motor vehicle designed for public road use, or any trailer;
The named insured or family member as a pedestrian if struck by a motor vehicle designed for public road use, or any trailer; and
Any other person while occupying a covered auto.
Exclusions
The following exclusions apply to the medical payments coverage. The insurer will not provide medical payments coverage for any insured for bodily injury sustained in the following situations:

While occupying any of the following vehicles:
With fewer than 4 wheels;
Used as a public livery, including being logged into a transportation network platform (this exclusion does not apply to a share-the-expense carpool or while the covered auto is being used for volunteer or charitable purposes);
Used as a residence or premises;
Used without permission;
Used in the business of an insured (except for a private passenger auto, pickup or van, or trailer); or
Located inside a facility designed for racing, and for the purpose of participating, competing, practicing, or preparing for any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest, or driver skill training or driver skill event;
While occupying, or when struck by, any vehicle (other than the covered auto) that is owned or regularly furnished for use by the insured or the insured's family member;
While occupying, or when struck by, any vehicle designed or used for flight;
In the course of employment if workers compensation benefits are required.
In addition, losses caused by a nuclear weapon, war, insurrection, rebellion or revolution, or by nuclear reaction, radiation, or radioactive contamination are also excluded.

Limits of Liability and Other Insurance
The amount of coverage depends on the policy and applies on a per-person basis for bodily injury sustained in an accident covered by the policy, regardless of fault. Medical payments coverage works similar to personal injury protection (PIP) coverage. For example, the insured's policy has a medical payment coverage limit of $10,000. The insured and the passenger were injured in an accident; one person had $12,000 in injuries, and the other $10,000. Part B will pay each person $10,000, up to the limit of coverage.

Any payments that also are available under liability or uninsured motorists coverage will reduce the amount payable under this coverage.

The other insurance clause also is shown in the medical payments section of the policy that is identical to the provision found in the liability coverage section.

6. Part C: Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist
Uninsured Motorist
Bodily injury as a result of an accident with an uninsured driver is included in the ISO personal auto policy. Some states amend this section as a requirement of state law. States that do not have laws requiring this coverage may make this coverage optional or include it as outlined below.

Make sure to carefully review the state specific requirements for uninsured motorists presented in the regulations section of this course.

Insuring Agreement
Uninsured motorist (UM) coverage provides the insured with money for bodily injuries that the insured would be legally entitled to recover from the owner or operator of a vehicle that does not carry the required liability insurance coverage. A vehicle that does not carry the required insurance is defined in this section of the PAP as an uninsured vehicle.

Although some definitions may vary according to state law, uninsured motorist coverage generally defines 4 categories of uninsured motor vehicles, including any land motor vehicle or trailer for which, at the time of the accident

There is no liability bond or insurance for the vehicle;
The bond or insurance is less than that required by the financial responsibility laws of the state in which the accident occurred;
The accident was a hit-and-run accident, and the driver cannot be identified; and
The bonding company or insurance company denies coverage or is insolvent.
Uninsured motor vehicle does not include any vehicle or equipment

Owned or available for regular use by the insured or a family member;
Owned by a self-insurer unless the self-insurer becomes insolvent;
Owned by a government agency;
Operated on rails or crawler treads;
Designed mainly for use off public roads (and while not on public roads); or
While used as a residence or premises.
Who is an Insured
Insured is defined under Part C: Uninsured/Underinsured Motorist as

The named insured and family members;
Any other person while occupying a covered vehicle; and
Any person entitled to recover damages because of injuries to one of the above.
Underinsured Motorist
Underinsured motorists (UIM) coverage helps an insured with bodily injury damage caused by another motorist when that motorist has insufficient coverage. UIM coverage will pay the difference between the at-fault driver's policy limit and the total cost of the damage they caused, up to the limit specified in the policy.

Total cost of the damage – At-fault driver's policy limit = Insured's UIM coverage


For example, Bob has a PAP with bodily injury limits of 25/50. Bob causes a car accident in which Zoe is injured. Zoe's bodily injury damages come to $65,000. Bob's bodily injury coverage will only pay for $25,000 of Zoe's damages, leaving her with $40,000 to pay. Here are 2 ways underinsured motorists coverage could respond, depending on Zoe's limits:

If Zoe's underinsured motorist limits are 100/150, her UIM coverage will pay the remaining $40,000 of BI damages:
$65,000 damage - $25,000 (Bob's per person limit) = $40,000 (covered by Zoe's UIM)
If Zoe's limits are 30/50, her UIM coverage will only pay another $30,000 of the $40,000 in BI damages. The remaining $10,000 would not be covered by insurance:
$65,000 damage - $25,000 (Bob's per person limit) = $40,000 (balance)
$40,000 - $30,000 (Zoe's UIM limit) = $10,000 (Zoe's out of pocket)
The definition of "underinsured" and how UIM coverage works varies by state. Make sure to check the Laws section for your state.

7. Part D: Coverage for Damage to your Auto
Coverage for Damage to Your Auto, commonly called physical damage coverage, includes both collision and other than collision coverage (previously referred to as comprehensive). Only when a premium is shown on the Declarations next to these coverages does coverage apply.

Insuring Agreement
The insuring agreement states that the insurer will pay for direct and accidental loss to a covered or nonowned auto, including equipment, minus any applicable deductible shown on the Declarations. If loss to more than one covered auto or nonowned auto results from the same collision, only the highest applicable deductible will apply.

The personal auto policy defines nonowned autos as any private passenger auto, pickup, van, or trailer which is operated by or in the custody of, but is not owned or furnished for the regular use of the named insured or a family member.

Transportation Expenses
Transportation expenses will be paid if the loss is caused by collision or other-than-collision, as long as the corresponding coverage is indicated in the Declarations. Coverage will apply to a covered auto and a nonowned auto.

The policy will usually pay up to a specified dollar amount per day up to a maximum ($20 per day/$600 maximum based on the Personal Auto ('05) ISO form, and $30 per day up to a maximum of $900 per the ('18) ISO form; may vary by state) for transportation expenses incurred by the insured due to a covered loss.


Expense payments begin after a 24-hour waiting period for reasons other than theft. In the event of theft of a covered vehicle, expenses are covered beginning 48 hours after the theft.

Transportation expenses are not subject to deductible, and are limited to the period of time reasonable required to repair or replace the covered auto.

Exclusions
The exclusions listed below apply for losses or damages to or caused by any of the following: 

While a covered vehicle is being used as a public livery, excluding carpools;
Wear and tear, freezing, mechanical or electrical breakdown, and road damage to tires (does not apply if the damage resulting from the total theft of a covered vehicle);
Radioactive contamination, nuclear weapons, war, insurrection, rebellion or revolution;
Electronic equipment designed for reproduction of sound, including radios, stereos, tape decks, and compact disk players and accessories (does not include permanently installed equipment and its accessories);
Any other electronic equipment that receives or transmits audio, visual or data signals, including citizen band radios, telephones, two-way mobile radios, scanning monitor receivers, television monitor receivers, video cassette recorders, audio cassette recorders, and personal computers and accessories (does not include equipment which is permanently installed in the dash or console of the vehicle);
A total loss due to confiscation or destruction by governmental or civil authorities;
A camper body, trailer, or motor home not shown in the declarations (does not apply to newly acquired camper bodies or trailers acquired during the policy period or insured by request within 14 days of ownership); this exclusion also applies to facilities or equipment used with the above types of vehicles;
Awnings, cabanas, or equipment designed to create additional living space;
Nonowned vehicles used without a reasonable belief that any insured is entitled to do so;
Radar detection equipment;
Any custom furnishings or equipment in any pickup or van exceeding coverage of $1,500, including special carpeting and insulation, furniture, bars, facilities for cooking or sleeping, height extending roofs, enhancers, winches, grilles, louvers, side pipes, hood scoops or spoilers, wheels, tires, spinners, caps, covers, bedliners, custom murals, paintings, or other decals;
Any nonowned auto being maintained or used by any person while engaged in the business of selling, repairing, storing, servicing, or parking vehicles;
Any covered auto located in a racing facility for the purpose of competing, practicing, or preparing for any organized racing or speed contest; and
Any nonowned auto rented by any insured if the rental company is prevented from recovering loss or loss of use from the insured because of the rental agreement or state law;
Any nonowned auto being used by any insured in connection with a personal vehicle sharing program if a provision of the program or state law prevents the recovery of loss or loss of use from the insured; and
Any loss to a vehicle which is designed or can be used for flight.
Limits of Liability
The limit of liability is the lesser of

The actual cash value of the vehicle at the time of the loss (which includes an adjustment for depreciation and physical condition); or
The amount necessary to repair or replace the vehicle.
Losses to nonowned autos will be covered the same as the broadest coverage available for any covered auto, except nonowned trailers are limited to $1,500. Electronic equipment that is permanently installed in a location not normally used by the auto manufacturer is covered up to $1,000.

Other Provisions
The physical damage section of the PAP also includes 4 other provisions. These provisions are similar to the conditions discussed for other property coverages, and include the following:

Payment of Loss — The insurer has the option of paying money, repairing or replacing the damaged or stolen property. In addition, if stolen property is recovered, the insurer may return the property to the insured, paying for any damage, or they may keep all or part of the property at an agreed or appraised amount.
No Benefit to Bailee — The insurance will not directly or indirectly benefit any carrier or bailee for hire (For example, if an insured's vehicle is in the care of a service station for repairs, and the vehicle is damaged while in their care, the service station will not receive any benefits from the insurance policy on the vehicle.) This provision is intended to provide insurance compensation to the victim of the loss (the insured), rather than paying it to the bailee.
Other Sources of Recovery — If other insurance is applicable, the insurer will pay on a proportional basis. Coverage for any covered nonowned auto is excess of any other collectible source which includes insurance and any other source of recovery available to the owner of the nonowned auto.
Appraisal — If the insured and the insurer cannot agree on a settlement, either party can demand appraisal. Each party will then select and pay for its own appraiser. The appraisers, in turn, will jointly select a third appraiser, called an umpire. The decision reached by at least 2 of the appraisers will be binding on both parties.
8. Part E: Duties after an Accident or Loss
Part E – Duties after an Accident or Loss outlines the duties required of any person seeking damages under the policy following a loss or accident. This PAP coverage part does not include any subsections.

If the insured fails to comply with this section of the policy, resulting in harm to the insurer, the insurer is relieved of its duty to provide coverage. These duties are similar to those already discussed for other types of insurance, and include

Prompt notification of loss;
Cooperating with the insurer;
Forwarding any legal papers received;
Submitting to a physical exam, examination under oath when requested, and recorded statements;
Allowing the insurer access to medical records;
Submitting a proof of loss;
Notifying the police of a hit-and-run accident or if a vehicle is stolen;
Protecting the property from further loss; and
Allowing the insurer to inspect and appraise the damaged property.
9. Part F: General Provisions
Part F – General Provisions in the personal auto policy form describes the conditions that apply to all coverage parts in addition to the conditions that apply to the individual coverages. These conditions, which are similar to some already discussed, are as follows:

Bankruptcy — Bankruptcy of the insured does not relieve the insurer of its obligations under the policy.
Policy changes — The terms and conditions may not be changed or waived except by endorsement to the policy issued by the insurance company.
Fraud — The insurer will not provide coverage for any insured that has made a fraudulent statement or engaged in fraudulent conduct as it pertains to any loss or accident.
Legal action against the insurer — No one may bring any legal action against the insurer until all policy provisions have been complied with.
Insurer right to recover payment (subrogation) — Subrogation rights apply to all coverages except physical damage coverage if the damage is caused by a person using the auto with a reasonable belief that they were entitled to do so.
Policy period and territory — The policy territory is defined as the United States, its territories and possessions (such as Puerto Rico or Guam), or Canada.
Termination — This provision specifies the rights and duties of the insured and insurer to cancel or nonrenew coverage. If a law in the state the policy was issued in requires a different period for notice or any special procedures other than those listed below, the policy will comply with the state provisions. In most states*, the insurer is required to provide 10 days' notice if for nonpayment of premium or if the policy is canceled within the first 60 days of initial coverage, and 20 days' notice for all other reasons. If the policy has been in force for more than 60 days, the insurer can only cancel because of nonpayment of premium, if an insured driver's license has been suspended or revoked, or if the policy was obtained through material misrepresentation. If the insurer decides to nonrenew coverage, the insurer must provide at least 20 days' notice before the renewal date. If the insured obtains other insurance on a covered auto, the policy will terminate on the effective date of the new policy.
Transfer of insured's interest in the policy (assignment) — The insured cannot transfer their rights or interest in the policy without the written consent of the insurer. If the named insured dies, coverage will be provided for the surviving spouse or legal representative of the insured, but only until the end of the policy period.
Two or more auto policies — If the insurer has issued 2 or more policies that will respond to the same loss, the insurer's liability will be the highest applicable limit of insurance under one policy.
*Make sure to carefully review your state's requirements for policy termination and notices if applicable.

10. Selected Endorsements
Optional endorsements can be used to modify the personal auto policy to fit the needs of individual insureds. Some of the more commonly used endorsements are discussed next.

Towing and Labor Costs
The towing and labor costs endorsement provides a basic limit of $25 for towing and labor costs incurred at the place a vehicle is disabled. Higher limits are available for an additional premium. Coverage applies to a covered auto or a nonowned auto, but only applies to costs incurred at the place of disablement.

Rental Reimbursement
The Rental Reimbursement endorsement is only available if the policy includes Other Than Collision coverage. This endorsement will reimburse the insured for rental charges incurred because the covered auto is out of use due to a covered loss.

Extended Nonowned Coverage for Named Individual
The extended nonowned coverage for named individual endorsement can broaden the liability only, or liability and medical payments coverage provided in the policy for individuals specifically named on the endorsement. It provides coverage for nonowned autos that are available for the regular use of the insured, the use of covered vehicles to carry persons or property for a fee, or use of covered vehicles in other businesses (excluding the automobile business).

Miscellaneous Type Vehicle
The miscellaneous type vehicle endorsement is used to expand the definition of a covered auto to include motorized vehicles such as motorcycles, motor homes, golf carts, dune buggies, and other recreational vehicles. The liability and medical payments exclusions regarding vehicles with less than 4 wheels do not apply when this endorsement is attached to the policy. Coverage is not provided for vehicles borrowed or rented unless a temporary substitute to a miscellaneous vehicle listed in the endorsement.

Joint Ownership Coverage
The joint ownership coverage endorsement is used when individuals own a vehicle together (insurable interest), but do not meet the traditional definition of an insured in the personal auto policy. Coverage applies to individuals, other than spouses, who reside in the same household and nonresident relatives. The vehicle owned must be listed in the endorsement, and coverage will not extend to any vehicle owned by any party that is not listed or included in the covered auto definition.

Skip to main contentSkip to navigation

Chapter 4. Types of Casualty Policies
0% Completed
Chapter 4. Types of Casualty Policies

B. Umbrella and Excess Liability

Umbrella and Excess Liability
There are some policies used in both commercial and personal insurance situations that are not designed to cover first-party property exposures. Umbrella or excess policies are used when an insured either is required or chooses to purchase limits that are higher than what is offered in the primary policy. Here are a few key terms related to these types of policies:

Underlying policy (primary liability policy) — a policy that is covered by the umbrella or excess policy. For example, if an insured had a homeowners policy, automobile policy and a watercraft policy, these would be considered underlying insurance for a personal umbrella policy. The limits of insurance for liability coverage (not property) of the underlying policies are used first, and then the limits available in the umbrella or excess coverage.

Umbrella (stand-alone) — umbrella policy differs from an excess policy in that the coverage provided can be greater or less than the underlying policies.

Excess (follow form) — an excess policy does not expand or restrict coverage in relation to the underlying insurance. The coverage mirrors the underlying policy, but increases the limit of liability based on the amounts selected by the insured.

Sometimes called catastrophe insurance, an umbrella or excess policy provides coverage over the underlying policy. These types of policies are commonly written to provide a minimum of $1,000,000 in additional coverage. There is usually a minimum limit of liability the insured must carry and maintain on the basic policies.

If an underlying policy is primary coverage, in a covered loss, there is no deductible that needs to be satisfied to access the umbrella or excess policy limits. However, in the case of a true umbrella policy, the potential exists for coverage on a primary basis within the umbrella. In other words, the primary or underlying policy does not cover the loss, but the umbrella does. The insured will, then, be required to pay a deductible known as self-insured retention (SIR).

The personal umbrella policy states that it will pay damages in excess of the primary or underlying insurance for bodily injury or property damage for which an insured becomes legally liable due to a covered occurrence, and personal injury for which an insured becomes legally liable due to one or more of the offenses listed under the definition of personal injury.

The personal umbrella policy defines insured as any of the following:

The named insured;
A family member;
Any person using an auto or recreational motor vehicle (all-terrain vehicle, dune buggy, golf cart, snowmobile, or any other motorized land vehicle designed for recreational use off public roads) that is owned by the insured and covered under the policy; any person using a temporary substitute for such auto or recreational vehicle also is an insured;
Any other person or organization, but only with respect to the legal responsibility for acts or omissions of the insured or any family member while using an auto or recreational vehicle (however, the owner or lessor of an auto or recreational vehicle loaned or hired for use by an insured or on an insured's behalf is not an insured); or
Any person or organization legally responsible for animals owned by the insured or any family member (however, a person or organization using or having custody of such animals in the course of any business or without the consent of the owner is not an insured).
The umbrella policy follows the underlying policies' coverage for watercraft and recreational vehicles. However, optional endorsements to exclude coverage for designated recreational vehicles are available to the insurer.

If a claim made or suit brought against an insured is caused by an offense to which coverage applies and underlying coverage is in effect, the umbrella insurer may join in the investigation and settlement of any claim, but the umbrella insurer will not contribute to any expenses incurred by the underlying insurer.

If underlying coverage is not in effect, the umbrella insurer will provide defense at the insurer's expense by counsel of the insurer's choice.

The insurer may settle any claim without the consent of the insured.

The coverage provided by the umbrella policy does not apply to the following:

Intentional injury or damage;
Personal injury arising out of the publication of material, if done by or at the direction of an insured with knowledge of its falsity;
Bodily injury or property damage from the ownership, maintenance, use, loading, or unloading of any recreational vehicle owned by any insured;
Loss from the use of any motor vehicle without the reasonable belief that that person is entitled to do so;
Loss from the use of any motor vehicle or watercraft while being operated or preparing for a prearranged race or speed contest; or
Bodily injury or property damage from an act or omission of an insured as an officer or member of a Board of Directors of a corporation.
Uninsured motorist/underinsured motorist coverage is also excluded by the umbrella policy, but can be reinstated through an endorsement in states where such coverage is required.

An insured must maintain the underlying insurance at the full limits stated in the declarations with no change to more restrictive conditions during the term of the policy. If any underlying insurance is canceled or not renewed and not replaced, the insured must notify the insurer immediately.

If the insured fails to maintain underlying insurance, the insurer will not be liable under the policy for more than it would have been liable if that underlying insurance was in effect.

Other conditions and general provisions of the policy track with the ISO personal lines format.

Skip to main contentSkip to navigation

Chapter 4. Types of Casualty Policies
0% Completed
Chapter 4. Types of Casualty Policies

Chapter Recap

Chapter Recap
This chapter explained various types of personal lines casualty or liability insurance policies. Let's recap some of the key concepts:

PERSONAL AUTO

Policy Parts

Part A - Liability
Part B - Medical Payments
Part C - Uninsured Motorist
Part D - Coverage for Damage to Your Auto
Part E - Duties after an Accident or Loss
Part F - General Provisions
Types of Auto

Owned - vehicle titled to the insured or acquired during policy period
Nonowned - private vehicles operated or in custody of the named insured, not titled to the insured
Hired - leased, rented, or borrowed
Temporary substitute - auto or trailer not owned by the insured used while the insured vehicle is out of service because of breakdown, repair, loss or destruction
Part A: Liability Coverage	
Pays for bodily injury and property damage, defense costs, and costs resulting from settlement or defense of insured
Limits of liability - maximum amount the policy will pay:
- Split limit - broken into bodily injury for each person involved, bodily injury for the entire accident, and property damage
- Combined single limit - one-dollar amount indicating the maximum coverage for all losses
Exclusions include but are not limited to:
- Intentional injury or damage
- Use of auto without permission
- Use of commercial-types vehicle in business
- Damage to property being transported
Part B: Medical Payments	
Pays for necessary medical and funeral expenses caused by an accident and sustained by insured
Must be rendered within 3 years of accident
Payments available from liability or uninsured motorist coverage reduce the amount of medical payments coverage
Part C: UM and UIM Motorist Coverage	
Uninsured motorist (UM) - for bodily injuries caused by another motorist who does not have required liability insurance coverage
Underinsured motorists (UIM) - for bodily injuries caused by another motorist with insufficient coverage
UIM coverage = Insured's UIM limits − Driver's BI limits
Part D: Coverage for Damage to Your Auto
Includes collision and other than collision coverages
Pays for direct and accidental loss to a covered or nonowned auto
Transportation expenses:
- Paid if loss is caused by collision or other-than-collision
- Applies to owned autos
- 24-hour waiting period for expense payments for losses other than theft (48 hours for theft)
Part E: Duties After an Accident or Loss
Prompt notification of loss
Cooperation with insurer
Forwarding legal papers
Submitting physical or other examinations under oath
Allowing insurer to access medical records
Notification of policy of a hit-and-run or theft
Protection of property from further loss
Allowing insurer to inspect and appraise damaged property
  UMBRELLA AND EXCESS LIABILITY
Types of Policies
Underlying policy - primary liability policy
Umbrella (stand-alone) - coverage can be greater or less than underlying policy
Excess (follow form) - mirrors underlying policy and increases limits of liability
Personal Umbrella	
Also referred to as catastrophe insurance
Protects insured from large claims and lawsuits
Minimum $1,000,000 in additional coverage
Self-insured retention (SIR) - retained limits the insured must pay before umbrella policy with respond to certain losses
Insured must maintain underlying insurance
Insurer is not liable beyond what it would pay if underlying insurance was in effect

Video Gallery: 
Skip to main content

Personal Auto Policy - General Form Structure and Definitions

Search


00:00
Let's take a look at the personal auto policy, or PAP.

00:04
Most people have experience with auto insurance because they've owned a car.

00:09
But much deeper knowledge is required to sell and explain auto insurance to your clients.

00:15
Your role as an insurance producer is to make sure that your clients understand the policies they buy and that they have the right amount of coverage to be adequately protected.

00:27
Personal auto policies have six parts, lettered A through F.

00:31
Part A is Liability.

00:33
Part B, Medical Payments.

00:35
Part C is for Uninsured Motorists.

00:38
Part D is for Damage to Your Auto.

00:41
Part E defines Duties After a Loss, and Part F is General Provisions.

00:48
You will look at each of these in greater detail a little later.

00:51
But for now, just remember that there are six specific coverages.

00:56
Now that you have a general idea about what the personal auto policy is made of, you need to understand key terms and definitions.

01:05
First of all, what is an auto?

01:08
Under a personal auto policy, an auto is any private passenger vehicle, including a pickup truck or a van, not used for farming, ranching, or transporting goods.

01:21
Covered or insured autos include any vehicles that are listed in the declarations, newly acquired vehicles — those that are bought during the policy period but are not specifically listed on the policy yet, any trailers owned by the insured and any temporary substitute for a covered vehicle while it's being serviced, repaired, or is otherwise unusable.

01:46
Next are named insured and insured.

01:50
In auto policies, the named insured is the person named in the declarations.

01:56
It also extends to the spouse of the named insured if they reside in the same household.

02:01
The term insured is much broader.

02:04
It includes the named insured, anybody who is driving the insured car with the insured's permission, any person occupying a covered vehicle, or getting in and out of the vehicle, and any person entitled to recover damages due to injuries to the named insured or family members.

02:24
You also need to understand the difference between the terms, collision, and other than collision.

02:30
Collision is any time a covered vehicle collides with another vehicle or object.

02:36
If a car hits a tree, hits a building, or hits another car, all of these would fall under collision coverage.

02:45
On the other hand, other than collision is damage to a covered vehicle that has been caused by something like falling rocks, hail, fire, theft, or breakage of glass.

02:56
Basically, collision is when your car hits something; other than collision is when something hits your car.

03:04
The only exception is when it comes to hitting birds or animals.

03:08
These incidents are classified as other than collision.

03:14
Finally, know that in insurance contracts, the terms "you" and "your" refer to the named insured, and the terms "we," "us," and "our" refer to the insurance company providing coverage.
Auto Scroll

Skip to main content

Part A: Liability

Search


00:00
The first coverage part in a personal auto policy is Part A: Liability.

00:06
And, remember, liability coverage applies to injuries or property damage to other parties caused by the insured.

00:13
It does not pay for the insured's own injuries or property damage.

00:18
Under Part A, the amount of coverage is presented either as split limits or a combined single limit.

00:26
No matter how the coverage is presented, auto policies cover bodily injury and property damage.

00:33
Split limits are the typical method for auto policies.

00:37
Coverage is split into three categories: bodily injury per single person, bodily injury for an entire accident (no matter how many people were injured), and property damage.

00:50
The limits are always presented in this order on the policy.

00:54
The first split limit is for bodily injury — or BI — per person.

01:00
This amount is the maximum the policy will pay to any single person injured in an accident.

01:07
The second limit is bodily injury per accident.

01:11
This amount is the maximum the policy will pay out for bodily injury for all injured persons in any single accident.

01:19
The third limit is for property damage — or PD — per accident.

01:24
That's the most a policy will pay for property damage in any one accident caused by the insured.

01:32
So let's look at an example that will show you how these numbers work together to cover an insured after an accident.

01:40
Let's say an insured has an auto policy with liability limits of $25,000/$50,000/$10,000, or 25/50/10.

01:51
What's the most the policy will pay out to any one individual for bodily injury?

01:56
$25,000.

01:59
What's the most the policy will pay out for bodily injuries to 2 or more people injured?

02:04
$50,000.

02:06
And what's left is the maximum the policy will pay for any property damage.

02:11
$10,000.

02:13
If the actual medical cost or damage repair costs exceed these amounts, then it's up to the insured to pay the balance.

02:22
Responsibility for paying any amounts beyond the limits of the policy shifts from the insurance company back to the insured.

02:30
Let's say there's an accident caused by the insured.

02:33
Two people are injured.

02:34
Person A has medical bills of $15,000, and Person B has medical bills of $30,000, and the damage to their car is $9,000.

02:45
How much will each person get?

02:47
Person A would get $15,000, the full amount of their bill, because it's less than the maximum amount per person.

02:55
However, Person B would only get $25,000, the limit of the policy payout to a single person.

03:03
What about the extra $5,000 the insured is responsible for?

03:08
They have to pay out of pocket.

03:10
It's important to realize here that the amount of one payout doesn't affect the amount of other payouts.

03:17
Even though Person A only got $15,000 out of the $25,000 limit, the extra $10,000 cannot be used to offset the $5,000 owed to Person B.

03:30
Finally, the policy will pay the full $9,000 for the car damage since it's within the maximum limit.

03:37
The total amount paid by the policy is $49,000: 15 + 25 + 9.

03:46
The important thing to understand here is that the insurer will first make sure that no more than $25,000 is paid to any single person.

03:56
Then the total bodily injury must not exceed $50,000.

04:01
And finally, they will apply $10,000 to total property damage.

04:07
Now, let's take a look at auto coverage with a combined single limit, which means that bodily injury and property damage are paid out of the same bucket of funds.

04:18
The only limit on payments is the total amount of coverage, a flat dollar amount that is the most in damages that the insurer will pay for any one accident.

04:29
To have a policy with the same amount of coverage as we just described in our example, you would need a $60,000 combined single limit policy.

04:38
That's the total of bodily injury limit per accident plus the property damage per accident (in our case, $50,000 plus $10,000).

04:47
So you have the same amount of coverage as in the split limits example.

04:52
If the company had to pay out the same claims, they would have paid out a total of $54,000 — $15,000 to the first person, $30,000 to the second person, and $9,000 in property damage — so that's $6,000 more than in the split limits example.

05:10
If the insurance company must pay out more on each claim, the cost of insurance has to go up as well.

05:17
So to be able to keep the insurance costs down to a level where most people can continue to afford it, personal auto policies usually offer the split limits coverage.
Auto Scroll

Skip to main content

Part B: Medical Payments

Search


00:00
As you continue to learn about different coverage parts and personal auto policies, ask yourself, what is the purpose of each coverage part and who is covered by it?

00:10
Remember, Part A was for liability, which means coverage to other people and their property.

00:17
Now, Part B is medical payments sustained by the insured themselves.

00:22
If the insured is injured in an accident, Part B steps in so that the insurer does not have to go out of pocket to pay for their own medical expenses.

00:32
Part B pays any necessary medical bills and funeral expenses incurred within 3 years of a covered accident.

00:40
That means any treatments or physical therapy the insured has to undergo in the 3 years after the accident will be covered.

00:48
Just like Part A, Part B pays up to a specific limit per person, per accident.
Auto Scroll

Skip to main content

Part C: Uninsured Motorists

Search


00:00
Another very important coverage in personal auto policies is Part C — uninsured motorists.

00:07
You may be surprised to learn that, depending on a state, anywhere from 5% to over 20% of drivers are uninsured, so the chances of getting into an accident with an uninsured driver or becoming a victim of a hit-and-run accident are pretty high.

00:24
That's where the uninsured or underinsured motorists coverage will help.

00:29
Uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage steps in if the vehicle owner who caused the damages has no insurance — that would be an uninsured motorist, or UM — or has insurance in the amounts less than required by the financial responsibility laws — that would be an underinsured motorist, or UIM.

00:51
It also applies when the at-fault driver has insurance from an insolvent company, or cannot be identified, so hit-and-runs are always considered to be committed by uninsured motorists.

01:04
So how it works is, if you have an uninsured motorist coverage, your insurance will step in and handle the claim as if it were covering the person who caused the accident.

01:14
With the underinsured coverage, the company pays the difference between the limits of the insured's UIM policy and the limits of the at-fault driver's policy.

01:26
UM and UIM policies help compensate the insured for insufficient coverage on the part of an at-fault driver.

01:34
In some states, uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage is mandatory.

01:39
So when an insurer receives their automobile policy, the coverage is going to be included, and is part of the premium payment.

01:46
In other states, the insureds must be offered that coverage, but they may choose to opt out of it.

01:52
Most of the time, the minimum required limits of liability for UM or UIM coverage must be the same as the liability limits for bodily injury or death contained in the policy.

02:04
However, the insured may purchase higher limits for UM or UIM coverage.

02:10
Note that the amount paid by UIM coverage cannot be more than the policy limits.
Auto Scroll

Skip to main content

Part D: Coverage for Damage to Your Auto

Search


00:00
Just like it sounds, Part D — coverage for damage to your car — provides coverage for physical damage to the insured's covered vehicle.

00:09
Remember: Part D for damage.

00:13
Part D is optional and is usually subject to a deductible.

00:17
It includes collision and other-than-collision coverages, but it only applies when a premium is shown in the declarations.

00:25
In other words, not every auto out there will have collision or other-than-collision coverage.

00:31
The limit of liability under Part D is either the actual cash value of the vehicle at the time of the loss, or the amount needed to repair or replace the vehicle, whichever is less.

00:45
The insurance company determines what happens here.

00:48
They'll evaluate the current value of the auto and compare it to what it would cost to repair it.

00:53
If the insurance company decides that the car is a total loss, then they will determine the cost to replace that car.

01:02
Part D includes other provisions pertaining to the payment of claims.

01:06
Their names are pretty descriptive: payment of loss, no benefit to bailee, other sources of recovery, and appraisal.

01:16
Payment of loss talks about the insurance company's options in responding to an accident.

01:22
The company may pay for the loss in cash, or they may offer to repair or replace damaged or stolen property after an accident.

01:31
To understand the no benefit to bailee provision, let's first define bailee.

01:37
Bailee is someone who has taken care, custody, or control of your vehicle.

01:43
If the insured takes their car to a repair shop, the repair shop is the bailee.

01:48
Under this provision, insurance may not directly or indirectly benefit any bailee.

01:55
If the repair shop damages the insured car, They will not receive any benefits from the insurance policy on the vehicle.

02:04
The other sources of recovery provision applies when there is more than one policy written on the same property.

02:10
In this situation, insurers pay on a proportional basis.

02:15
No matter how many policies are in effect, none of them will pay more than their fair share of the claim, and the total payment from all policies cannot exceed the total amount of the loss.

02:28
Finally, there is the appraisal provision.

02:32
If the insured and the insurer cannot agree on a settlement, either party may demand an appraisal.

02:39
Each party then selects an appraiser, and those two appraisers choose a third appraiser called the umpire.

02:46
The goal is for two of the three to agree on a settlement.

02:50
Both the insured and the insurer are bound by that settlement.

02:55
In addition, Part D will pay for insurance transportation expenses up to a specified limit per day and a specified total limit.

03:04
For losses caused by both collision and other-than-collision, as long as the corresponding coverage is indicated in the declarations.
Auto Scroll

Skip to main content

Part E: Duties After an Accident or Loss

Search


00:00
Part E of personal auto policies outlines insured's duties after an accident or loss.

00:06
It's very important for you, as a producer, to understand those, and educate and guide your clients along the way to make sure their claims are paid.

00:16
Know that the insurer has no duty to provide coverage if failure on the part of the insured to comply with their duties after a loss is deemed unfair or harmful to the insurer.

00:28
First and foremost, after an accident, a claimant must promptly notify the insurer of how, when, and where the accident happened.

00:38
Promptly is the key word here.

00:41
A person seeking coverage has to file a claim and supply whatever information is necessary in order for the claim to be resolved,

00:48
and that includes cooperating with the insurer, promptly sending copies of any notices or legal papers related to the accident, submitting to physical exams or recorded statements if required,

01:02
authorizing the insurer to obtain any pertinent records on the insurer, and submitting a proof of loss when required by the insurer.

01:12
All of these are about helping the insurance company settle any claim as quickly as possible.

01:18
In the case of a hit-and-run accident, a claimant must first promptly notify the police, and then send the insurer copies of any legal papers.

01:28
Remember that hit-and-run drivers are always considered uninsured motorists, so those claims will be covered by uninsured motorist coverage.

01:38
Insureds are also responsible for protecting property from further loss.

01:43
That makes sense, right?

01:45
There's already been an accident, but it's the insured's duty to prevent additional damage to the vehicle unrelated to the accident.

01:53
This could be something like having the vehicle towed from the accident site to a more secure holding spot.

01:59
The car is wrecked, but the insured is preventing it from being vandalized or further damaged by exposure to weather.

02:07
And finally, an insured has to allow the insurer to inspect and appraise the damaged property.

02:13
The insurer will have somebody come out to take a look at the damaged automobile and determine the extent of those damages and how to best resolve the situation.
Auto Scroll

Skip to main content

Part F: General Provisions

Search


00:00
The last section of the personal auto policy, Part F — general provisions, describes provisions and conditions that apply to the entire policy.

00:09
These provisions are presented in the order they appear in the ISO form.

00:14
The first one is bankruptcy.

00:17
The thing to remember is that even if an insurer becomes bankrupt or insolvent, that does not relieve them from their obligations under the policy.

00:26
The insurer still has an obligation to pay claims.

00:31
Next is policy changes.

00:34
Any policy changes can only be affected by endorsements issued by the insurer.

00:40
Endorsements are required to change or waive the terms of a policy.

00:45
If the insurer makes a change that broadens coverage for the insured without additional premium, that change will automatically apply to the policy because it benefits the insured.

00:57
The fraud provision states that the insurer will not provide coverage if the insured makes fraudulent statements or engages in fraudulent conduct in connection with any accident or loss.

01:08
Pretty straightforward.

01:11
Next is legal action against the insurer.

01:14
Before anyone can bring legal action against the insurer, they must be in full compliance with all policy terms.

01:22
In addition, legal action cannot be brought until the insurer agrees in writing that the insured has an obligation to pay, or the amount of that obligation has been finally determined by judgment after trial.

01:36
Insurer's right to recover payments is another provision, also known as subrogation.

01:42
In simple terms, subrogation is the legal right of the insurance company to seek damages from third parties after it has reimbursed the insured for a loss.

01:54
The policy period and territory provision defines the time period the policy is in effect, and the location where coverage applies.

02:03
Note that in personal auto policies, policy territory includes the United States, its territories and possessions, Puerto Rico, and Canada.

02:12
You need to know that for your exam.

02:15
The termination provision spells out the rights and duties of the insurer and the insured to cancel or nonrenew coverage.

02:23
The ISO form stipulates that an insurance company must give 10 days' notice if it is canceling a policy for nonpayment of premium, or if the cancellation is within the first 60 days.

02:36
In all other cases, the required notice is 20 days.

02:40
Policy nonrenewal requires the same 20 days notice.

02:45
That's the standard that most states use, but you'll wanna check your state's requirements in your course.

02:51
There is also a provision regarding the transfer of insurance interest in the policy, or policy assignment — similar to the policy changes provision.

03:00
The insured cannot transfer their rights or interest in the policy without the written consent of the insurer.

03:08
Finally, if the insurer has two or more auto policies with the same insurer that apply to the same percent, the maximum limit of liability under all policies will not exceed the highest applicable limit of insurance under one policy.

03:25
There you have it: Part F, general provisions.
Auto Scroll

Skip to main content

Selected Endorsements

Search


00:00
Insurance policies aren't one size fits all, and endorsements help modify coverage to suit the needs of the insured.

00:08
Here, we'll cover some of the most common endorsements used in personal auto policies, but keep in mind that your state-specific course may include additional endorsements.

00:19
Let's start with the miscellaneous type vehicle endorsement.

00:24
It expands the definition of a covered auto to include motorized vehicles, like motorcycles, motor homes, golf carts, or other recreational vehicles.

00:34
Personal auto policies do not actually cover any of these types of vehicles, unless this endorsement is added.

00:42
The towing and labor costs endorsement provides a basic dollar limit for towing and labor costs incurred at the place a vehicle is disabled.

00:52
Higher limits may be added for an additional premium.

00:55
Coverage applies to a covered auto or a non-owned auto, but again only applies to costs incurred at the place of disablement.

01:04
Joint ownership coverage endorsement would be added to policies when the insured and another person co-own a vehicle, but do not meet the traditional definition of an insured.

01:14
This applies to individuals who reside in the same household, other than spouses and nonresident relatives.

01:21
The vehicle owned must be listed in the endorsement, and coverage will not extend to any vehicle owned by any party not included in the covered auto definition.

01:33
The extended nonowned coverage for named individual endorsement broadens the liability only or liability and medical payments coverage for drivers specifically named in the endorsement.

01:46
It applies to nonowned autos that are regularly available for the insured's use, that are used to carry people or property for a fee, or that are used in other businesses.
Auto Scroll

Flash Cards: 

What Personal Auto coverage would pay for damages to a covered auto caused by a collision with a deer?
Answer
Other Than Collision (Comprehensive)
Underinsured Motorist (UIM) coverage will pay the difference between which 2 limits?
Answer
The insured’s UIM limits and the at-fault driver’s insurance bodily injury limits
What losses are excluded from coverage in the liability section of the Personal Auto Policy?
Answer
intentional injury or dmagae, damage to property owned or transported by the insured, use of a vehicle as a public conveyance, or use of a vehicle without permission.(please review the text for a complete list of exclusions.)
What type of auto coverage will apply in a hit-and-run accident where the driver cannot be identified?
Answer
Uninsured Motorist
What is a covered auto?
Answer
A vehicle shown in the policy declarations
What is the limit of liability in Part D: Coverage for Damage to Your Auto?
Answer
The lesser of the actual cash value of the vehicle or the amount needed to repair or replace the vehicle
Coverage for medical payments under a Personal Auto Policy applies to expenses following a covered accident that are incurred and services rendered within what time period?
Answer
3 years
In Personal Auto Policy, to what geographical region does the out-of-state coverage apply?
Answer
Any U.S. state or territory, as well as Canada
What would be considered a newly acquired auto?
Answer
A vehicle acquired by the insured during the policy period
Rental reimbursement endorsement is available only if an auto policy has what type of coverage?
Answer
Other than Collision Coverage
What types of losses are indicated by the split limits in an auto insurance policy?
Answer
Bodily injury per person, bodily injury per accident, and property damage per accident
Who is considered insured under Part A: Liability of a personal auto policy?
Answer
The vehicle owner or their family member, or any person using the covered auto with permission
If an insured is injured while driving his own car, what coverage in his personal auto policy will pay for the loss?
Answer
Part B: Medical Payments
What does the term "you" refer to in a personal auto policy?
Answer
The named insured shown in the declarations, and the insured’s spouse (if resident of the same household)
What are the 4 categories of uninsured motor vehicles?
Answer
1)  No insurance or liability bond; 2) Insurance is less than what’s required by the financial
responsibility laws; 3) A hit-and-run accident where the driver cannot be identified; and 4) The
insurer denies coverage or becomes insolvent.
If an auto policy has split limits of 30/50/25, what is the maximum amount the policy will pay for injuries to one person in a single accident?
Answer
$30,000
When does the Underinsured Motorist coverage apply?
Answer
When the motorist is at fault in an accident, but the limits of their auto insurance are not sufficient to cover the bodily injury to another motorist
If an auto policy has liability limits of 40/60/20, what would be the equivalent combined single limit?
Answer
$80,000 – combined total of coverage for bodily injury and property damage
What Personal Auto Coverage would pay for the insured's travel expenses and loss of earnings while the insured is involved in the settlement process of a covered loss?
Answer
Part A: Liability
When does Uninsured Motorist coverage apply?
Answer
When the other party is legally liable but has no insurance
What is a combined limit in an auto insurance policy?
Answer
The maximum amount the insurer will pay on a covered loss
If an auto policy has split limits of 30/50/25, how much will the policy pay for property damage in a single accident?
Answer
$25,000
