Before you learn about the different types of insurance policies, you need to understand some basic terminology and concepts. First, you need to know what insurance is and who or what may become insured. You will also learn the terms that are used specifically in property and casualty or liability insurance. In general, this section helps build a foundation of knowledge that makes it easier for you to learn the rest of the material in this course, so it is important for you to master these ideas before moving on to the next section.

Terms to Know
Depreciation — reduction in value, particularly due to wear and tear
Exposure — susceptibility to risk
Implied warranty — a legal term meaning that a product is suitable for its intended purpose and that it fits an ordinary buyer's expectations
Insurance policy — a contract between a policyowner (and/or insured) and an insurance company which agrees to pay the insured or the beneficiary for loss caused by specific events
Insurer (principal) — the company who issues an insurance policy
Obsolescence — depreciation in the value of a property due to becoming outdated
Premium — the money paid to the insurance company for the insurance policy
Tort — a wrongful act or the violation of someone's rights that leads to legal liability

General Insurance Principles
Insurance is a transfer of risk of loss from an individual or a business entity to an insurance company, which, in turn, spreads the costs of unexpected losses to many individuals. If there were no insurance mechanism, the cost of a loss would have to be borne solely by the individual who suffered the loss.

Know This
Insurance is the transfer of risk of loss. The cost of an insured's loss is transferred over to the insurer and spread among other insureds.
1. Law of Large Numbers
The basis of insurance is sharing risk among a large pool of people with a similar exposure to loss (a homogeneous group). The law of large numbers states that the larger the number of people with a similar exposure to loss, the more predictable actual losses will be. This law forms the basis for statistical prediction of loss upon which insurance rates are calculated.

Example:

When an insurance company issues a policy on a 35-year-old male, the company really has no way of knowing or accurately predicting when he will die. However, the Law of Large Numbers looks at a large group of similar risks – 35-year-old males of similar lifestyles and health conditions – and makes some conclusions based on statistics of past losses. This allows the insurance company to have a general idea about the predicted time of death for this type of insured and to set the premiums accordingly.

Know This
As the number of people in a risk pool increases, future losses become more predictable.
2. Insurable Interest
The insured must have an insurable interest in the person or property covered by an insurance policy. In property insurance, this means the insured would incur a financial loss if the insured property was damaged. As a result, an insurable interest may be created by the ownership, custody or control of a property. For example, mortgagees and leaseholders may have an insurable interest in their respective properties.

The 3 elements of insurable interest are:

Financial (a monetary interest);
Blood (a relative); and
Business (a business partner).
In property and casualty insurance, insurable interest must exist at the time of the loss.

3. Risk
Risk is the uncertainty or chance of a loss occurring. The two types of risks are pure and speculative, only one of which is insurable.

Pure risk refers to situations that can only result in a loss or no change. There is no opportunity for financial gain. Pure risk is the only type of risk that insurance companies are willing to accept.
Speculative risk involves the opportunity for either loss or gain. An example of speculative risk is gambling. These types of risks are not insurable.
Know This
Only pure risks are insurable.
4. Hazard
Hazards are conditions or situations that increase the probability of an insured loss occurring. Conditions such as slippery floors, or congested traffic are hazards and may increase the chance of a loss occurring. Hazards are classified as physical hazards, moral hazards; or morale hazards.

Physical hazards are those arising from the material, structural, or operational features of the risk, apart from the persons owning or managing it.
Moral hazards refer to those applicants that may lie on an application for insurance, or in the past, have submitted fraudulent claims against an insurer.
Morale hazard refers to an increase in the hazard presented by a risk, arising from the insured's indifference to loss because of the existence of insurance.
5. Peril
Perils are the causes of loss insured against in an insurance policy.

Life insurance insures against the financial loss caused by the premature death of the insured;
Health insurance insures against the medical expenses and/or loss of income caused by the insured’s sickness or accidental injury;
Property insurance insures against the loss of physical property or the loss of its income-producing abilities;
Casualty insurance insures against the loss and/or damage of property and resulting liabilities.
6. Loss
Loss is defined as the reduction, decrease, or disappearance of value of the person or property insured in a policy, caused by a named peril. Insurance provides a means to transfer loss.



Know This
A risk is a chance that a loss will occur; a hazard increases the probability of loss; a peril is the cause of loss.
7. Indemnity
Indemnity (sometimes referred to as reimbursement) is a provision in an insurance policy that states that in the event of loss, an insured or a beneficiary is permitted to collect only to the extent of the financial loss, and is not allowed to gain financially because of the existence of an insurance contract. The purpose of insurance is to restore, but not let an insured or a beneficiary profit from the loss.

Life and Health Example:

Brenda has a health insurance policy for $20,000. After she was hospitalized, her medical expenses added up to $15,000. The insurance policy will reimburse Brenda only for $15,000 (the amount of the loss), and not for $20,000 (the total amount of insurance).

Property and Casualty Example:

Brenda has a homeowners insurance policy for $200,000. After her home was destroyed, her expense to rebuild the home added up to $150,000. The insurance policy will reimburse Brenda only for $150,000 (the amount of the loss), and not for $200,000 (the total amount of insurance).

Know This
Indemnity means insureds cannot recover more than their loss.
8. Subrogation
Subrogation is the insurer's legal right to seek damages from third parties, after it has reimbursed the insured for the loss. Subrogation is based on the principle of indemnity by preventing the insured from collecting on the loss twice: once from the insurer and a second time from the party that caused the damage.

Property and Casualty Terms
1. Accident vs. Occurrence
An accident is a sudden, unplanned and unexpected event, not under the control of the insured, resulting in injury or damage that is neither expected nor intended.

An occurrence is a broader definition of loss than accident because it includes those losses caused by continuous or repeated exposure to conditions resulting in injury to persons or damage to property that is neither intended nor expected.

2. Direct and Indirect Loss
The two types of property losses that an individual or a business may be exposed to are direct and indirect. Property insurance only covers direct losses. However, indirect losses are related to the direct loss, and insurance coverage to protect against these indirect losses often is added to property insurance policies. Direct losses mean direct physical damage to buildings and/or personal property.

Direct loss also includes other damage where the insured peril was the proximate cause of loss. For example, an insured building catches fire. When the fire department applies water to put out the fire, the wall and floor coverings suffer water damage. Although water damage is not an insured peril, the damage is paid under the peril of fire because fire was the proximate cause.

Indirect losses, also known as consequential losses, are losses considered a result of direct loss. Such losses usually result from the time it takes to repair or replace damaged property. The most prevalent type of indirect loss for individual homeowners is the extra living expense that may be incurred by the insured while the home is being repaired. For commercial risks, the primary type of indirect or consequential loss is the loss of profits a business may suffer because of having to close down until the business is repaired.

3. Named Peril vs. Special (Open) Peril
A peril is a specific cause of loss. Perils insured against in standard property policies include fire, wind, hail, and explosions.

Named peril is a term used in property insurance to describe the breadth of coverage provided under an insurance policy form that lists specific covered perils. No coverage is provided for unlisted perils.

Open peril is a term used in property insurance to describe the breadth of coverage provided under an insurance policy form that insures against any risk of loss that is not specifically excluded. (This term replaced the use of the term "all risks.")

4. Negligence
Negligence is the failure to use the care that a reasonable, prudent person would have under the same or similar circumstances.

Contributory Negligence
Under contributory negligence, the injured party must be completely free of fault in order to collect. Any negligence on the part of the injured party that contributed to the injury, however slight, normally will defeat the claim. A variation of contributory negligence is known as "the last clear chance rule." It may be used as a defense by a negligent party who can show the injured party had the last clear chance to avoid the loss, but did not.

Comparative Negligence
Because of the harshness of contributory negligence, the majority of states have adopted a somewhat more lenient doctrine, known as comparative negligence. Here, the other party's negligence or fault will not necessarily defeat the claim, but will be used to mitigate the damages payable to the other party. Under this statutory defense, the fault is shared between the parties involved, and the awards for damages are reduced by the percentage of negligence of each party.

Some states have adopted the rule of pure comparative negligence, which allows the plaintiff (the party who brings the lawsuit) to recover the damages, as long as the plaintiff is not 100% negligent. In contrast, modified comparative negligence, also known as "equal to or greater than" rule, the injured party may only recover damages if their fault is less than that of the defendant (the party being sued).

In auto accident claims, insurance adjusters apply the comparative negligence rule to determine each party's liability, or the degree of negligence, based on the percentage each person is found to be at fault. For example, if one driver makes a left turn on a red light and is hit by another driver who is speeding through the intersection, the driver who was making an illegal turn may be found to be 80% guilty of the accident, while the speeding driver will be 20% at fault. If the speeding driver submits a claim for damages, he may collect only 80% for the damages (because 20% of the damages were due to his own negligence).

5. Burglary, Robbery, and Theft
Burglary is the crime of forced entry into or out of the premises of another by a person or persons with felonious intent. Insurance policies covering the peril of burglary require that, following a loss, there are visible signs of forced entry or exit from the premises.

Robbery is the taking of property from the care and custody of a person by one who has caused or threatened to cause that person bodily harm, or committed an obviously unlawful act witnessed by that person.

Theft is any act of stealing and encompasses both burglary and robbery.

6. Mysterious Disappearance
Mysterious disappearance is the disappearance of property without knowledge as to the location, time or how the property was lost. Losses by mysterious disappearance are excluded from most insurance policies.

7. Vacancy and Unoccupancy
Vacancy refers to an insured structure in which no people have been living or working, and no property has been stored for the period of time required as stated in the policy (usually 60 days).

Unoccupancy (nonoccupancy) refers to an insured structure in which no people have been living or working within the required period of time, but some property is stored.

For example, if the insured moved, the house would be considered vacant. If the insured went on vacation for 2 weeks, the house would be considered unoccupied.

8. Medical Payments
Medical payment coverage, sometimes referred to as MedPay, covers medical costs due to injury on a no-fault basis. There is no requirement for the insured to be legally liable, only that the injury is a result of the insured's activities or on an insured location. Medical payments are not to be confused with liability coverage, which protects the insured from lawsuits or damages due to negligence.

9. Blanket vs. Specific Coverage
Blanket insurance is a single property insurance policy that provides coverage for multiple classes of property at one location, or for one or more classes of property at multiple locations. All insured properties are written for one total amount of insurance, and no single insured item is assigned a specific amount of insurance. However, different amounts may be shown for buildings in general, equipment in general, and other items.

Specific insurance is a property insurance policy that covers a specific kind or unit of property for a specific amount of insurance.

10. Damages
A tort may result in two forms of injury to another: bodily injury and property damage. In the case of property damage, the extent of the loss is usually simple to determine; it is measured by the actual monetary loss the injured party suffered, which is measured by the value of the property damaged or destroyed and the loss of use of that asset.

In the case of bodily injury, it is more difficult to determine the loss monetarily. Bodily injury may lead to claims by the injured party not only for medical expenses and lost wages, but also for disfigurement, pain and suffering, mental anguish, and loss of consortium. The two classes of compensatory damages that may be awarded are special and general damages. Special damages are specific out-of-pocket expenses for medical, miscellaneous expenses, and loss of wages. General damages compensate the injured person for pain and suffering, mental anguish, disfigurement, and other similar types of losses. (Determination of the amount of general damages is highly subjective and can amount to whatever a judge or jury feels is "right.") The third class is punitive damages, which is a form of punishment for extreme outrageous behavior, gross negligence, or willful intent.

Loss Valuation
At the time a property insurance policy is written, the insured has several options as to how a loss to the insured property will be valued at the time of a loss. Loss valuation is a factor in determining the premium charged and the amount of insurance required.

1. Actual Cash Value
The actual cash value (ACV) method of valuation reinforces the principle of indemnity because it recognizes the reduction of value of property as it ages and becomes subject to wear and tear and obsolescence. Usually, actual cash value is calculated as follows:

Current Replacement Cost – Depreciation = Actual Cash Value

2. Replacement Cost
Replacement cost is defined as the cost to replace damaged property with like kind and quality at today's price, without any deduction for depreciation. This method of loss valuation is contrary to the basic concept of indemnity because following a loss it may provide the insured with a settlement in excess of the property's actual cash value.

3. Market Value
Market value is a seldom used method of valuing a loss based upon the amount a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for the property prior to the loss. This method takes into consideration the value of land and location, rather than just the cost of rebuilding the structure itself.

4. Stated Value
A stated amount is an amount of insurance scheduled in a property policy that is not subject to any coinsurance requirements in the event of a covered loss. This scheduled amount is the maximum amount the insurer will pay in the event of a loss.

5. Salvage Value
Most policies contain a right of salvage condition that allows the insurance company to take possession of the property after payment of a loss. By selling salvaged goods, the insurance company can reduce the cost of the claim.

Salvage value is the estimated value an asset will realize upon its sale at the end of its useful life. The property may be sold as a whole or in part. For instance, a car may be beyond repair as a complete automobile but some parts may be salvageable and sold.

Liability
Absolute liability is imposed upon a person or company engaged in hazardous or potentially dangerous business who, by negligence or by an omission, causes harm or injury to another person or property. Examples of absolute liability include owning a swimming pool, harboring wild animals, or selling explosives. The injured party does not need to prove negligence.

Strict liability is commonly applied in product liability cases. A person or business that manufactures or sells a product makes an implied warranty that the product is safe. The business is then liable for defective products, regardless of fault or negligence. If the product causes injury and the claimant can prove the defect, the defendant will be held strictly liable for the damage.

The vicarious liability doctrine comes from the old English law "respondeat superior," in which the master was liable for the acts of their servants. The purpose of this doctrine is to transfer the liability from one person to another person who would probably have a greater ability to pay. In some jurisdictions, parents may be held vicariously liable for negligent acts of the children and employers liable for the acts of their employees.

1. Limits of Liability
Limits of liability are the insurer's liability for payment as stated in an insurance policy. Limits of liability is the maximum amount of money the insurance company will pay for a particular loss, or for loss during a period of time.

Per Occurrence (Accident)
Per occurrence is a sublimit in a liability policy that puts a ceiling on the payment for all claims that arise from a single accident/occurrence.

Per Person
Per person is the maximum amount available for payment of bodily injury to a single person in an accident, regardless of the policy limit stated in the policy for bodily injury claims.

Aggregate - General vs. Products - Completed Operations
Aggregate limit is the maximum limit of coverage available under a liability policy during a policy year, regardless of the number of claims made or the number of accidents that occur. Losses paid under coverages subject to aggregate limits reduce the amount available for future losses. Aggregate limits are restored at the anniversary of the policy.

Split
Split limits are separately stated limits of liability for different coverages. The limits may be stated on a per person, per occurrence, or per policy period basis, or can be split between bodily injury and property damage. Many auto liability policies are written with split limits. For example, 25/50/25 would indicate that the policy would pay up to $25,000 for the injury of a single person; up to $50,000 for bodily injury to two or more people (but not more than $25,000 to any one person); and up to $25,000 for damage to property of others.

Combined Single
Combined single is a single dollar limit of liability applying to the total of damages for bodily injury and property damage combined, resulting from one accident or occurrence. The limit may be used in any combination of amounts, not to exceed the single limit.

Other Related Concepts
1. Proximate Cause
Proximate cause is an act or event considered a natural and reasonably foreseeable cause of the damage or event that occurs and damages property or injures a plaintiff. Negligence must have been the proximate cause of the damage if the injured party is to collect for the damage. This means that there must have been an unbroken chain of events beginning with the act of negligence and leading to the injury or damage. Negligence must have been the cause without which the accident would not have happened, also referred to as direct liability.

2. Deductible
In property and casualty insurance, a deductible is a dollar amount an insured must pay on a claim before the insurance policy provides coverage. A higher deductible amount usually lowers the amount of the premium.

3. Coinsurance or Insurance to Value
The coinsurance clause states that, in consideration of a reduced rate, the insured agrees to maintain a certain minimum amount of insurance on the insured property. This encourages the insured to insure the property closer to its full value. In case of a partial loss, the insurer will pay the partial loss in full if the insured has maintained the required percentage of insurance with relation to the value of the property. If the amount of insurance maintained is less than the coinsurance clause requirement, the insurer will only pay the percentage of the loss that the insurance bears in relation to the amount of insurance that should have been carried. In the event of a total loss, the coinsurance clause does not operate, and the face amount of the policy is paid.

The formula for calculating coinsurance penalties is the amount of insurance carried over the amount of insurance the insured should have had, multiplied by the loss, which equals the reduced payment for loss.

(Insurance Carried ÷ Insurance Required) × Loss Amount = Loss Payment

For a $100,000 building insured with an 80% coinsurance percentage, the insured would have to carry at least $80,000 ($100,000 × .80) of insurance to meet the coinsurance requirement. If, instead, the insured only carried $40,000 of insurance and had a $10,000 loss, he would have to bear 50% of the loss due to the deficiency, or $5,000, and any deductible.

The insurance to value provision, usually found in homeowners policies, provides a replacement cost settlement to the policyholder who carries adequate insurance, which means that the property is insured to the exact dollar amount or percentage of value. If the amount of insurance is less than the value assumed in the premium rate calculation, the insured would still be indemnified at least to the amount of the actual cash value of the loss.

4. Deposit Premium Audit
Deposit premium is an estimated premium paid in advance at the time the policy is issued that may be adjusted based on actual exposures. The actual premium can be determined by the audit of the insured’s records at the end of the insuring period. If the audit determines that the initial premium collected was too low, additional premium will be assessed, and vice versa, if the audit shows that the initial premium to the insured was too high (the exposures were over-estimated), the insured will receive a return premium. Typically, audit premium is used with liability and workers compensation insurance.

Deposit premium audit is a condition that allows the insurer to audit the insured's books or records at the end of the policy term to make sure adequate premium has been collected for the exposure. Usually, the insurer has up to 3 years from the expiration of the policy to perform the audit.

5. Certificate of Insurance
A certificate of insurance is written evidence showing that an insurance policy has been issued. The certificate indicates both the amounts and types of insurance provided, but does not obligate the insurer to the person to whom the certificate was issued.

Compliance with Provisions of Fair Credit Reporting Act
The Fair Credit Reporting Act is administered by the Federal Trade Commission. The purpose of the law is to protect consumers against the circulation of inaccurate or obsolete personal financial information, and to ensure that consumer reporting agencies are fair and equitable in their treatment of consumers.

Chapter Recap
This chapter explained the basic terminology and concepts found in property and casualty insurance. Let's recap them:

GENERAL INSURANCE PRINCIPLES
Law of Large Numbers

The larger number of people with similar exposure to loss, the more predictable the actual losses will be

Insurable Interest

Must exist at time of loss
3 elements:
Financial
Blood (family)
Business
Risk	
Uncertainty regarding financial loss
2 types of risks:
Pure - insurable because it involves a chance of loss only
Speculative - not insurable because it involves a change of gain
Hazard	
Conditions that increase the probability of loss occurring
3 types of hazards:
Physical - a physical condition
Moral - a tendency toward increased risk
Morale - an indifference to loss
Indemnity	
Often referred to as reimbursement
Insureds or beneficiary are permitted to collect to the extent of financial loss (no financial gain)
Subrogation	
Insurer's legal right to seek damages from third parties
Occurs after insurer reimburses insured
Prevents insured from collecting twice
PROPERTY AND CASUALTY TERMS

Accident vs. Occurrence

Accident - sudden, unplanned and unexpected event resulting in injury or damage
Occurrence - includes losses caused by continuous or repeated exposure to conditions resulting from injury or property damage
Damages	
Comprised of bodily injury or property damage
Special damages - out-of-pocket expenses for medical, miscellaneous expenses, or loss of wages
General damages - compensate for pain and suffering, mental anguish, or disfigurement
Punitive damage - punishment for extreme behavior, gross negligence or willful intent
Negligence	
Failure to use reasonable and prudent care
4 elements:
Legal duty
Standard of care
Unbroken chain of events
Actual loss or damage
LOSS VALUATION
Types of Loss Valuation
Actual cash value (ACV)
Replacement cost
Market value
Agreed value
Stated value
Salvage value
LIABILITY

Types of Liability

Strict liability - often applied to product liability cases
Vicarious liability - liability imposed on one party as a result of another
Limits of liability:
Per occurrence (accident)
Per person
Aggregate
Split
Combined
OTHER RELATED CONCEPTS

Proximate Cause
Cause of bodily injury or property damage is natural and reasonably foreseeable
For injured party to collect damages, negligence must have proximate cause
Deductible	
Dollar amount must be met by insured before insurer provides coverage
Higher deductible equals lower premium
Coinsurance and Insurance to Value	
Insured maintains a minimum amount of insurance on property
Partial loss paid in full if minimum is met
Coinsurance clause not affected in total loss
Loss payment = (Insurance Carried ÷ Insurance Required) × Loss Amount
Insurance to value - replacement cost settlement for policyholders who carry minimum insurance
Deposit Premium and Audit	
Deposit premium - estimated premium paid in advance of policy being issued
Deposit premium audit - insurer may audit insured's books and records to determine adequate premium
Certificate of Insurance	
Written evidence showing the insurance policy has been issued
Lists amounts and types of insurance provided
