Chapter 6. Florida Statutes, Rules and Regulations Pertinent to Personal Lines Insurance
This section presents specific regulations that apply to Property and Casualty or Liability Insurance in this state. By the end of this section, you will be able to explain the major requirements and limits associated with property and liability coverage.
Insurance Contracts
1. Renewal, Nonrenewal, Cancellation
Insurers that issue policies providing coverage for property and casualty (other than motor vehicle insurance), workers compensation, surety, or marine insurance are required to provide the first-named insured with advance written notice of policy nonrenewal or cancellation, and the reasons for that action. The advance notice must be at least 45 days if nonrenewal, cancellation, or termination is the reasons other than nonpayment of premium.

If the cancellation is for nonpayment of premium, the insurer must provide at least 10 days' written notice of cancellation.

If a cancellation or termination occurs during the first 60 days of the policy, and the insurance is cancelled or terminated for reasons other than nonpayment of premium, at least 20 days' written notice must be given to the insured.

2. Proof of Loss
An insurer is required to provide forms of proof of loss upon written request from a person claiming to have a loss under an insurance contract. The insurer, however, has no responsibility for the completion of the forms.

3. Payment of Claims
Insurers are not obligated to always pay on insurance claims. Under certain conditions, in fact, insurers are not required to perform, even if the event is covered by the insurance policy. Insurers are not obligated to pay in the following circumstances:

The insured intentionally caused damage to the insured property;
The event involves illegal actions, and the owner of the insured property knew of the criminal actions; or
The insured has breached a warranty or is guilty of a fraudulent misrepresentation or concealment.
Premium Financing
A general lines agent may make reasonable service charges for financial insurance premiums on policies issued by the agent. The service charge cannot exceed $3 per installment, up to the $36 maximum per year. In lieu of service charges, an insurance agent or agency may charge an interest rate not to exceed 18% per year on any unpaid balances.

Insurers are required to file premium finance agreement forms and the service charge or interest rate plan with the Office.
Citizens Property Insurance Corporation
The Citizens Property Insurance Corporation is an organization created to offer affordable property insurance to applicants who are in good faith entitled to purchase insurance through the voluntary market but are unable to do so. The Corporation must adhere to a plan of operation approved by the Financial Services Commission and is subject to continuous review by the Commission.

If coverage is available from an authorized insurer at an approved rate, the risk will not qualify for a policy from the Corporation unless the premium from the authorized insurer is at least 20% higher than the Corporation's premium for equivalent coverage.

The following would NOT be covered under the Corporation:

Structures with a dwelling replacement cost of more than $700,000;
Condominiums that includes dwelling and contents with a replacement cost of more than $700,000;
Condominiums if 50% of their units are rented out more than 8 times in a calendar year for periods of less than 30 days;
Structures located in wind-borne debris regions and that have an insured value of $750,000 or more; or
Any major structure that is newly constructed, or rebuilt, repaired, restored, or remodeled to increase the total square footage of finished area by more than 25 percent that is seaward of the coastal construction control line or is within the Coastal Barrier Resources System.
Property Insurance
1. Hurricane Occurrence and Deductible
For the purposes of hurricane coverage, hurricane is defined as a storm system that has been labelled a hurricane by the National Hurricane Center of the National Weather Service. In Florida, the duration of the hurricane includes the following time period:

Beginning at the time a hurricane watch or hurricane warning is issued for any part of Florida by the National Hurricane Center of the National Weather Service;
Continuing for the time period during which the hurricane conditions exist anywhere in Florida; and
Ending 72 hours following the termination of the last hurricane watch or hurricane warning issued for any part of Florida by the National Hurricane Center of the National Weather Service.
Unless clearly stated, insurers may not issue policies that contain deductible provisions that apply solely to hurricane losses or solely to roof loss, or state the deductible as a percentage rather than a specified dollar amount.

Insurers must offer alternative deductible amounts applicable to hurricane losses equal to $500, 2%, 5%, and 10% of the policy dwelling limits, unless the specific percentage deductible is less than $500.

For policies covering dwelling risks of at least $100,000, but less than $250,000, the insurer may (instead of offering a policy with a $500 hurricane deductible) offer a policy that the insurer guarantees it will not nonrenew for reasons of reducing hurricane loss for one renewal period and that contains up to a 2% hurricane deductible. For policies covering dwelling risks of at least $250,000 or more, the insurer doesn't need to offer the $500 hurricane deductible, but must offer hurricane deductibles in the amounts of 2%, 5% or 10%.

For policies covering dwelling risks of $1 million or more, but less than $3 million, in lieu of offering the required 2% deductible, the insurer may offer a deductible amount applicable to hurricane losses equal to 3% of the policy dwelling limits.

For policies covering dwelling risks of $3 million or more, the insurer may NOT offer a 2% deductible, but must offer 5% and 10% deductible amounts.

Any policy that contains a separate hurricane deductible must on its face include in boldfaced type no smaller than 18 points the following statement:

"THIS POLICY CONTAINS A SEPARATE DEDUCTIBLE FOR HURRICANE LOSSES, WHICH MAY RESULT IN HIGH OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES TO YOU."

A policy containing a coinsurance provision applicable to hurricane losses must on its face include in boldfaced type no smaller than 18 points the following statement:

"THIS POLICY CONTAINS A CO-PAY PROVISION THAT MAY RESULT IN HIGH OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES TO YOU."

 

2. Wind Mitigation and Premium Discounts
State law requires insurers to provide savings to consumers who install or implement windstorm damage mitigation techniques, alterations, or solutions to their properties to prevent windstorm losses. When filing rates for residential property insurance, insurers must include actuarially reasonable discounts, credits, reduction in deductibles, and similar discounts for properties with fixtures or construction techniques that reduce the amount of loss in a windstorm. Wind mitigation alterations include roof enhancement features, roof-to-wall connections, wall-to-floor-to-foundation strength, opening protection, and window or door strength.

Insurers may also implement discounts or rate differentials of up to 10% of the annual premium to mobile home owners who provide evidence of a current inspection of tie-downs for the mobile home, certifying that the tie-downs have been properly installed and are in good condition.

Every October 1, the Florida International University center, which develops, maintains, and updates the public model for hurricane loss projections, must publish a report summarizing loss data and associated exposure data from September 1 of the previous year through August 31 of the current year collected from residential property insurers and licensed rating and advisory organizations. The type of data includes the following:

The type, age, wind mitigation features, and location of each property insured;
The amount and type of coverage written on each of those properties;
The amount, date, and type of damage paid for by the insurer on each property; and
The amount of any reserves held by an insurer for future payments or expenses on damages associated with the date or dates of occurrence of hurricanes.
This report is to be submitted to the State Governor, the President of the Senate, and the speaker of the House of Representatives.

3. Catastrophic Ground Cover Collapse vs. Sinkholes
All insurers transacting property insurance in Florida must offer coverage for catastrophic ground cover collapse. Catastrophic ground cover collapse refers to any geological activity resulting in the following:

The abrupt collapse of the ground cover;
A depression in the ground cover clearly visible to the naked eye;
Structural damage to the covered building, including the foundation; and
Condemnation from a government agency, requiring an insured structure to be vacated.
Residential property policies may include a deductible for sinkhole losses equal to 1%, 2%, 5%, or 10% of dwelling policy limits. Insurers may require an inspection of the property before issuance of sinkhole loss coverage.

For an additional premium, the insurer may provide coverage for sinkhole losses on any structure and its contents. The insurer may restrict catastrophic ground cover collapse and sinkhole loss coverage to the principal building.

Limited sinkhole coverage insurance may be issued by an authorized insurer; however, it is not mandatory. A limited sinkhole policy provides personal lines residential coverage only and is not required to cover contents and additional living expenses.

Coverage for repairs may be limited in accordance with a professional engineer's recommendations. Policy limits cannot be less than $50,000, unless costs exceed the replacement cost of the property.

In the event losses cannot be repaired within the policy limits, the insurer must either pay the cost recommended by the insurer's professional engineer, regardless of policy limits, or pay the cost to complete repairs up to the policy limits if the insured is entering into a contract to repair the sinkhole loss in accordance with the repairs recommended by the insurer's professional engineer.

Any insurer who offers limited sinkhole coverage insurance must notify the Office of Insurance Regulation of any change in rates, no later than 30 days from becoming effective. Rate data must be maintained for at least 2 years.

Insurers must notify the Office at least 30 days before writing limited sinkhole coverage, including a plan of operation and financial projections.

4. Fungus
Limited fungi, wet or dry rot, or bacteria coverage is an endorsement that may be used to add special limits for losses caused by fungi, dry and wet rot, and bacteria. This endorsement applies to both property and liability losses.

5. Loss Assessment (HO-6)
Coverage under a unit owner's residential property policy (HO-6) must include at least $2,000 in property loss assessment coverage for all assessments made as a result of the same covered loss. A deductible of no more than $250 per direct property loss applies.

The maximum amount of any unit owner's loss assessment coverage that can be assessed for any loss is the limit in effect 1 day before the date of the occurrence. Changes made to the limits of a unit owner's coverage on or after the day before the date of the occurrence are not applicable to such loss.

Every HO-6 policy must contain a provision stating that the loss assessment coverage is excess coverage over the amount under any other policy on the same property.

6. Exclusions
The following types of property are not covered in any of the homeowners coverage forms issued in this state:

Land;
Structures used for business purposes;
Structures rented to others who are not tenants of the dwelling, other than a garage;
Specifically described items covered by other insurance;
Animals, birds or fish;
Aircraft;
Property rented or held for rental to others away from the premises;
Property of tenants;
Property in an apartment rented to others, except as noted under the additional coverage for landlord furnishings;
Motor vehicles and motorized land conveyances, including equipment and accessories, except motorized vehicles used to service the premises which are not subject to vehicle registration;
Vehicle's sound recording, receiving or transmitting devices including tapes or other media used with the equipment while in the vehicle; and
Paper records and electronic data (coverage is provided for the cost of blank recording media or prerecorded computer programs).
In addition, all policies exclude losses if caused by any of the following:

Losses caused by the ordinance of law, meaning a homeowners policy will not pay for loss of value of the insured property because of requirements of an ordinance or law, but it will pay for increased cost of repair because of enforcement of such ordinance;
Losses that result from power failure;
Intentional acts;
Losses caused by the insured's neglect to preserve or save property; and
Earth movement.
7. Loss Settlement
Whenever an insurer in this state agrees in writing to a settlement of a claim, the insurer is required to pay according to the terms of the agreement no later than 20 days after the settlement is reached. If the payment is not issued within 20 days of the agreement, the insurer will be obligated to pay interest at a rate of 12% per year from the date of the agreement.

8. Dispute Resolution
The Florida Statutes have established an alternative dispute resolution procedure for a mediated claim resolution conference prompted by the need for effective, fair, and timely handling of property insurance claims. Mediation helps the parties involved to establish an informal, nonthreatening forum to resolve their claims disputes, and to void expensive and time-consuming adversarial appraisal process required for litigation.

Motor vehicle and casualty insurance contracts: For any personal injury claim filed for an amount of $10,000 or less, or any property damage claim arising out of the ownership, operation, use, or maintenance of a motor vehicle, either party may demand mediation of the claim prior to demanding litigation.

The insurer must bear all of the cost of conducting mediation conferences. If a policyholder fails to appear at the conference, the policyholder must pay the costs of the conference before it can be rescheduled. If the insurer fails to appear, the insurer must pay the actual cash expenses the policyholder incurred to attend the conference.

Only one mediation may be requested for each claim, unless all parties agree to further mediation.

Homeowners and commercial residential insurance policyholders and insurers may request mediation as an alternative procedure for resolution of disputed property insurance claims.

When the policyholder files a claim, the insurer must notify the policyholder of its right to participate in the mediation program. The costs of mediation must be reasonable, and insurers must pay the costs of conducting mediation conferences.

Mediation is nonbinding; however, if a written settlement is reached, the insured has 3 business days within which to rescind the settlement unless the insured has cashed or deposited any settlement funds disbursed to the insured as a result of the conference.

9. Flood
The term "flood" is defined as a general or temporary condition of inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties. Flooding must result from overflow of inland or tidal waves, unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters, mudflow, or collapse of land resulting from waves or excessive cyclical levels.

Florida insurers have the option to issue flood insurance policies, endorsements, or excess coverage on structures or personal property contained in them. Flood insurance may be issued on the following bases:

Standard flood insurance — covers losses resulting from flooding, equivalent to coverage through the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP);
Preferred flood insurance — covers the same losses as standard flood, in addition to losses from outside water sources, coverage for additional living expenses, and the cost of repair or replacement, based on replacement costs up to the policy limits;
Customized flood insurance — provides broader coverage than standard flood insurance;
Flexible flood insurance — covers loss resulting from flood, outside sources, and includes one or more of the following provisions:
An agreement that flood coverage is a specified amount;
The inclusion of a deductible in an amount equal to that of hurricane losses;
A requirement that flood losses be adjusted on an actual cash value basis;
A restriction limiting coverage to the principal building listed in the policy;
An inclusion or exclusion of additional living expense coverage; and/or
An exclusion of personal property or contents coverage.
Supplemental flood insurance — designed to supplement coverage obtained through the NFIP, which may cover jewelry, art, deductibles, and additional living expenses.
All flood insurance deductibles and policy limits must be clearly noted on the policy declarations. If an insurer intends to change coverage rates, it must inform the Office of Insurance Regulation at least 30 days from the effective date. Rate records must be open to the Office for examination and maintained for at least 2 years.

If flood insurance cannot be attained through at least three admitted insurers, an applicant may seek coverage through a surplus lines insurer.

Insurers who solicit flood insurance must provide applicants with a notice stating, if the applicant discontinues coverage through the NFIP at a subsidized rate, the full risk rate may apply to property if the applicant decides to reinstate coverage. Insurers may request the Office provide a certificate, certifying that the insurer's policy, contract, or endorsements equal or exceed coverage provided through the NFIP.
Auto Insurance
1. Required Coverages
Financial Responsibility Law
While Florida law requires that owners of a motor vehicle carry Personal Injury Protection and Property Damage Liability insurance continuously throughout the licensing and registration period, if a person has been in an accident, the owner may be required to carry Bodily Injury Liability coverage of at least $10,000 per person and $20,000 per occurrence to comply with the Financial Responsibility Law.

Factors that trigger this requirement may include a conviction for a traffic violation or failure to pay for accident damages.

To meet the requirements of the Financial Responsibility Law, the coverage must be issued by an insurance company authorized to transact business in the state and the policy must be countersigned by an agent licensed to sell insurance in Florida.

Failure to comply with this requirement will result in suspension of driver's license, vehicle tag and registration. If the insurance company cancels PIP and PDL coverage and the person fails to obtain new coverage, the person must then provide proof of insurance and pay a reinstatement fee of:

$150 for the first offense;
$250 for the second offense; and
$500 for each additional offense within a three-year period.
To satisfy the requirements of Florida's Financial Responsibility Law, personal auto policies must have at least the following coverage limits:

Bodily injury liability: $10,000 per person and $20,000 per occurrence; and
Property damage: $10,000.
Policies with a single limit of liability must have at least $30,000 of coverage.

Personal Injury Protection (PIP)
Persons in Florida owning a self-propelled vehicle having four or more wheels and that is registered and licensed in the state are required to have continuous insurance that includes a minimum of $10,000 of personal injury protection (PIP) and $10,000 of property damage liability (PDL). This requirement also applies to any nonresident who owns and operates a vehicle and is living in Florida at least 90 days of the year.

Personal Injury Protection covers the insured and other members of the named insured's household, as well certain passengers of the auto who lack PIP, and certain licensed drivers who drive the insured vehicle with the permission of the insured.

PIP will provide coverage for a person injured in the insured vehicle who otherwise lacks access to PIP or does not own a vehicle. However, PIP will not cover an injured person occupying the insured vehicle who owns a vehicle but lacks PIP.

In Florida, PIP coverage protects the insured while in the insured auto or someone else's vehicle. It also protects the insured and family members when injured as pedestrians or bicyclists if the injuries arise from an accident involving a motor vehicle.

Personal Injury Protection covers only the insured and members of the named insured's household for accidents occurring outside Florida but within the United States or Canada. In such cases, the insured must be driving or riding in their own vehicle. It does not cover persons other than the insured or members of the named insured's household.

Personal Injury Protection pays for the following:

80% of medically necessary expenses;
60% of lost wages;
100% of replacement services (such as child care, housekeeping or yard work); and
$5,000 for death benefits.
For a higher premium, you may (in some cases):

Amend PIP to increase medical expenses to100% and lost wages to 80%; or
Increase your minimum limits from $10,000 to $20,000 or more. (Some companies do not offer increased limits, but will offer other options.)
A deductible provision in an insurance policy specifies the amount of money the insured must pay per insurance claim. After an accident, the insured pays the deductible, and the insurance company pays the remainder of the approved claim, up to the coverage limits. Usually, the higher a policy's deductible, the lower the premium costs.

In Florida, an insurance company must offer PIP deductibles in the amounts of $250, $500, and $1,000.

It is the insured's choice whether to choose a PIP deductible. If a deductible is chosen, the insured may elect one that applies to only the insured or to the insured and other members of insured's household.

The deductible will not apply to anyone else, even when the insured is covered by the PIP of the policy.

Deductibles are not applied to reduce the amount of the death benefit.

Disability benefits are considered an optional exclusion in PIP.

If this exclusion is selected, the premium will be reduced; however, in the event of disability resulting from a vehicle accident, no loss of wages benefits will be paid.

2. Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist
Uninsured/Underinsured Motorist Coverage pays for bodily injury to the insured and members of the insured's family arising out of an accident caused by the negligence of an at-fault party that either does not have insurance or has insurance with limits inadequate to pay for the damages incurred or when injuries are caused by a hit-and-run vehicle.

This coverage will provide protection to the insured and members of the insured family occupying any auto and will provide protection to other persons while occupying the insured auto.

Uninsured Motorist will pay for medical expenses and lost wages (beyond PIP coverage) that the insured or other covered persons incur as a result of an accident caused by the negligence of another party. This coverage also includes payment for pain and suffering if the injured party suffers permanent injury or death.

Uninsured Motorist insurance comes in stackable and nonstackable coverage. Companies must offer stackable coverage but may or may not offer a nonstackable option.

Stackable coverage means that the insured may combine the coverage limits for each auto insured under the policy. For example: an insured that has three autos insured for the minimum limits of 10/20 in the event of a loss, could claim coverage of $30,000 per person and up to $60,000 per occurrence, the total of the limits on each auto.

Insurance companies may offer nonstackable coverage at a reduced cost since they will only pay the maximum amount allowed for one insured auto.

3. Cancellation and Nonrenewal
No notice of cancellation of an auto policy must be effective unless it is based on one or more of the following:

Nonpayment of premium;
Material misrepresentation or fraud; or
The driver's license or motor vehicle registration of the named insured or of any other operator who either resides in the same household or customarily operates an auto insured under the policy has been under suspension or revocation during the policy period or the 180 days immediately preceding its effective date or, if the policy is a renewal, during its policy period.
To be effective, a notice of cancellation must be mailed or delivered by the insurer to the named insured and to the named insured's agent at least 45 days prior to the effective date of the cancellation, except when the cancellation is for nonpayment of premium, the notice must be mailed or delivered 10 days prior to the effective date of the cancellation and be accompanied by the reason for the cancellation.

In the event the insurer intends not to renew a policy, the insurer must give written notice of at least 45 days and the reason for refusal to renew must accompany the notice. (No insurer shall fail to renew a policy for reasons based entirely on the sex, occupation, marital status, residence, military service, or age of the insured, or on the principal place of garaging of the insured vehicle in this state.)

4. Mature Drivers
Any policy rates filed with the Office must provide for an appropriate reduction in premium charges when the principal insured on the covered vehicle is age 55 or older, who has successfully completed a motor vehicle accident prevention course. In addition, the insurer may require, as a condition for the discount, that the insured is not involved in an accident for which the insured is at fault, and not convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere (no contest) to a moving traffic violation. The premium reduction will be in effect for a 3-year period.

5. Motorcycle Coverage
The miscellaneous type vehicle endorsement is used to expand the definition of a covered auto to include motorized vehicles such as motorcycles, motor homes, golf carts, dune buggies, and other recreational vehicles. The liability and medical payments exclusions regarding vehicles with less than 4 wheels do not apply when this endorsement is attached to the policy. Coverage is not provided for vehicles borrowed or rented unless a temporary substitute to a miscellaneous vehicle listed in the endorsement.

In this state, any person operating a motorcycle or moped is granted all of the rights and is subject to all of the duties applicable to drivers of any other vehicle. 

6. Florida Automobile Joint Underwriting Association (FAJUA)
The Joint Underwriters Association was developed to provide coverage to individuals that are unable to secure coverage in the voluntary market, but otherwise qualify for automobile insurance (must have a valid driver's license).

All insurers authorized to write auto insurance must participate in this assigned risk plan, with the exception of self-insurers. The plan provides Liability coverage limits up to $100/$300/$50, and can include PIP and UM/UIM coverage. Medical Payments coverage with limits of $500, $1,000 or $2,000 may be purchased, as well as Physical Damage coverage on the vehicle.

Agents have authority to immediately bind coverage upon securing a completed and signed application and upon payment of the required deposit premium by the applicant.

Comparative Negligence Law
Because of the harshness of contributory negligence, the majority of states have adopted a somewhat more lenient doctrine, known as comparative negligence. Here, the other party's negligence or fault will not necessarily defeat the claim, but will be used to mitigate the damages payable to the other party. Under this statutory defense, the fault is shared between the parties involved, and the awards for damages are reduced by the percentage of negligence of each party.

Some states have adopted the rule of pure comparative negligence, which allows the plaintiff (the party who brings the lawsuit) to recover the damages, as long as the plaintiff is not 100% negligent. In contrast, modified comparative negligence, also known as "equal to or greater than" rule, the injured party may only recover damages if their fault is less than that of the defendant (the party being sued).

Surplus Lines
All states require an insurer to obtain a license or certificate of authority to transact the business of insurance in the state. These insurers are called admitted or authorized insurers. The term nonadmitted insurance means any property and casualty insurance permitted to be placed directly or through a surplus lines broker with a nonadmitted insurer eligible to accept such insurance. Each state makes certain exceptions to allow nonauthorized or nonadmitted insurers to transact business within the state. The permitted types of transactions are usually limited to insurance that is difficult to place, or insurance that is not readily available through an authorized insurer in the state. These unauthorized insurers are called excess or surplus lines insurers. Although the insurance company is unregulated, the insurance may be sold only through licensed excess and surplus lines brokers.

Each state defines those circumstances in which excess and surplus lines insurance may be written. The following are some of the general requirements:

After diligent effort, the insurance cannot be written through an authorized carrier;
The purpose of writing the insurance through an excess or surplus lines insurer must not be to obtain a better price or better terms; and
The coverage must be written through a state-licensed excess or surplus lines broker.
Although these insurers are considered unauthorized, most states compose an approved listing of excess and surplus lines insurers. The NAIC also publishes a listing of excess and surplus lines insurers that it deems acceptable, and many states have adopted this listing.

1. Florida Surplus Lines Service Office
The Florida Surplus Lines Service Office is a self-regulating organization that established a system that permits better access by consumers to approved unauthorized insurers. All surplus lines agents must be deemed to be members of this association and must report to and file with the service office a copy of each surplus lines insurance policy.

2. Eligibility for Export
Insurance coverage cannot be eligible for export unless it meets all of the following conditions:

The full amount of insurance required cannot be procurable from authorized insurers. Surplus lines agents must verify that a diligent effort has been made to find an authorized insurer.
The premium rate at which the coverage is exported cannot be lower than that rate applicable in actual and current use by a majority of the authorized insurers for the same coverage and similar risk.
The policy cannot be more favorable to the insured in terms of coverage and rate than under similar contracts from authorized insurers.
Except in connection with fire insurance policies or windstorm insurance, the deductible amounts cannot be different than those available under similar policies used by authorized insurers.
For personal residential property risks, the agent must advise the insured in writing that coverage may be available and may be less expensive from Citizens Property Insurance Corporation.
A reasonable per-policy fee may be charged by the filing surplus lines agent for each policy certified for export. This fee must be itemized separately to the customer before purchase and enumerated in the policy.
