In this section, you will examine some important concepts that are pertinent to insurance contract law and policy provisions. First, you will learn about special characteristics of an insurance contract, and the required elements that must be included in each. Next, you will focus on legal concepts and definitions that apply to all insurance policies. By the end of this chapter, you will be able to explain the purpose of each contract element and provision.

Terms to Know
Appraisal — a professional assessment to determine extent of damage
Earned premium — the portion of premium paid in advance that now belongs to the insurer because it applies to the elapsed part of the policy
Liberalization — the removal or loosening of restrictions
Negligence — the failure to use the care that a reasonable, prudent person would under the same or similar circumstances
Policyowner — the person entitled to exercise the rights and privileges in the policy
Third party — an individual or an entity other than the two parties involved in an insurance contract (insured and insurer)
Underwriting — risk selection; the process of reviewing applications for insurance to determine eligibility for coverage

Insurance Contracts
1. Elements of a Contract
In order for insurance contracts to be legally binding, they must have 4 essential elements:

Agreement — offer and acceptance;
Consideration;
Competent parties; and
Legal purpose.
Offer and Acceptance
There must be a definite offer by one party, and the other party must accept this offer in its exact terms. In insurance, the applicant usually makes the offer when submitting the application. Acceptance takes place when an insurer’s underwriter approves the application and issues a policy.

Consideration
The binding force in any contract is the consideration. Consideration is something of value that each party gives to the other. The consideration on the part of the insured is the payment of premium and the representations made in the application. The consideration on the part of the insurer is the promise to pay in the event of loss.

Know This
Insurer's consideration is the promise to pay for losses; insured's consideration is the payment of premium and statements on the application.
Competent Parties
The parties to a contract must be capable of entering into a contract in the eyes of the law. Generally, this requires that both parties be of legal age, mentally competent to understand the contract, and not under the influence of drugs or alcohol.

Legal Purpose
Every insurance contract must have a legal purpose. This means the contract must be for a lawful reason, and not against public policy.

2. Representations, Warranties, and Concealment
Representations are statements believed to be true to the best of one's knowledge, but they are not guaranteed to be true. For insurance purposes, representations are the answers the insured gives to the questions on the insurance application.

Untrue statements on the application are considered misrepresentations and could void the contract. A material misrepresentation is a statement that, if discovered, would alter the underwriting decision of the insurance company. Furthermore, if material misrepresentations are intentional, they are considered fraud.

Know This
Representations are statements believed to be true. Insured's statements on the application are representations.
A warranty is an absolutely true statement upon which the validity of the insurance policy depends. Breach of warranties can be considered grounds for voiding the policy or a return of premium. Because of such a strict definition, statements made by applicants for life and health insurance policies, for example, are usually not considered warranties, except in cases of fraud.

Concealment is the legal term for the intentional withholding of information of a material fact that is crucial in making a decision. In insurance, concealment is the withholding of information by the applicant that will result in an imprecise underwriting decision. Concealment may void a policy.

3. Binders
A binder is a temporary agreement issued by an agent or insurer providing temporary coverage until a policy can be issued. A binder is usually in writing, but may be verbal. Binders expire when the policy is issued. However, the policy effective date would be the same as the date when the binder was issued. If the insurer declines to issue the policy, the binder expires on the date after receipt of the notice of cancellation.

Policy Structure
Every property or casualty policy is comprised of the following major components:

Declarations;
Definitions;
Insuring agreement;
Additional coverage;
Conditions;
Endorsements; and
Exclusions and policy limits.
1. Declarations
Declarations is the section of an insurance policy containing the basic underwriting information, such as the insured's name, address, amount of coverage and premiums, and a description of insured locations. It also contains any supplemental representations by the insured. This is usually the first page of the policy.

2. Definitions
The definitions component of an insurance policy clarifies terms used in the policy. Typically, words that are printed in bold, italics, or quotations have a definition as to their meaning in that contract.

3. Insuring Agreement or Clause
An Insuring Agreement (sometimes labeled Agreement) is the section of an insurance policy that establishes the obligation of the insurance company to provide the insurance coverages as stated in the policy. Among other things, the insuring agreement lists the parties to the contract, effective and renewal dates, the description of coverage provided, and perils. It is usually found after policy Declarations, but may be placed after Definitions.

4. Additional or Supplementary Coverage
Additional (or supplementary) coverage is a provision in an insurance policy that provides an additional amount of coverage for specific loss expense, at no additional premium. Examples: claim-related expenses, reasonable expenses incurred by an insured to protect damaged property from further loss, and defense expenses.

5. Conditions
Conditions is the section of an insurance policy that indicates the general rules or procedures that the insurer and insured agree to follow under the terms of the policy.

The following are examples of conditions:

Inspections may be made as needed by the insurer. The insurance company reserves the right to inspect or examine the insured's location or books to determine the exact exposure for underwriting and rating purposes.
Changes to the policy must be made by the insurer and be in writing.
The liberalization clause ensures that if the insurer introduces improved coverage free of charge, the insured will get the benefit of the new coverage immediately and will not have to wait for policy renewal.
Return of premium dictates the method that will be used to calculate the return premium when the policy is cancelled before the expiration date.
6. Endorsements
Endorsements are printed addendums to a contract that are used to change the policy's original terms, conditions, or coverages. Endorsements may be included at the time the policy is issued or added during the policy term. Endorsements must be in writing, attached to the policy and signed by an executive officer of the insurer to have any effect on the contract. Endorsement may be used to add or delete coverage, or may be used to correct items such as the insured name or address.

7. Exclusions and Limitations
The exclusions section of an insurance policy details the perils that are not insured against and what persons are not insured. Exclusions restrict some of the broad terms used in the insuring agreement. This section can exclude people (except a spouse), property, and perils.

The following are examples of exclusions from coverage in a property policy: earth movement and water damage.

Earth movement is excluded if caused by earthquake, mudflow, or a volcanic eruption; and
Under the water damage exclusion, the following perils are not covered: flood and subsurface water, water that backs up through sewers and drains or overflows from a sump pump, or water below ground that seeps through basement walls.
8. Policy Limits
Policy limits (also known as limitations) are the maximum amount an insured may collect, or for which an insured is protected under the terms of the policy.

Insured and Insurance Company
1. Definition and Duties of the Insured
In property and casualty insurance, an insured is anyone who is covered under the policy, whether named or not. An example of an insured would include an unnamed spouse or any resident relative that is a member of the named insured's household.

Named insured means the individual(s) whose name appears on the policy's Declarations.

First named insured is the individual whose name appears first on the policy's declaration. In commercial insurance policies, the first named insured has control of the policy and is the only insured who may cancel the policy or request changes to the policy, and also is the one responsible for paying premiums and reporting losses.

Additional insureds are individuals or businesses that are not named as insureds on the declaration page, but are protected by the policy, usually in regard to a specific interest. Additional insureds usually are added to the policy by an endorsement.

In the event of a loss covered by the policy, the named insured is required to

Protect the damaged property from further damage;
Prepare an inventory of damaged property;
Cooperate with the insurer in settling the loss;
Notify the police in the case of a loss due to theft; and
Submit to the insurer a signed sworn proof of loss within an allotted amount of time after being requested to do so.
2. Obligations of the Insurance Company
An insurance company, in return for the premiums paid by the policyowners, must be fair in underwriting and must pay for covered losses.

Provisions and Clauses
1. Assignment
Assignment is the transfer of a legal right or interest in an insurance policy. In property and casualty insurance, assignments of policies are valid only with the prior written consent of the insurer.

2. Appraisal
If there is a disagreement between the insured and the insurer on the value of any property loss, either party can make a written demand for an appraisal. Each party will select a competent appraiser who will then select an umpire if they are unable to agree on a fair value.

3. Other Insurance
Other insurance is a provision in an insurance policy that defines how the policy will respond if there is other valid insurance written on the same risk.

Pro rata is a provision found in some property insurance policies that provides for the sharing of loss with other insurance that may be written on the same risk in the same proportion as their limits of insurance bear to the total of coverage of all policies covering the risk, whether collectible or not. To preserve the principle of indemnity, each policy pays a pro rata share based upon the share of the coverage. The insured cannot collect the full amount of loss from each policy.

4. Notice of Claim
Notice of claim is a form or statement from an insured to an insurer, informing the insurer that events leading to a possible claim have occurred. The notice will include information as to how, when, and where the loss took place.

5. Proof of Loss
Proof of loss is a sworn statement that must usually be furnished by the insured to an insurer before any loss under a policy can be paid. This form is typically used in the settlement of first-party losses, and includes the date and description of the occurrence and the amount of indemnity claimed.

The initial claim report to the insurer may be oral or in writing, but the proof of loss must be in writing. Proof of loss is required near the end of the claims process.

6. Loss Settlement
A loss settlement provision details how a claim will be paid. Depending on the type of policies, loss settlement options are actual cash value, replacement cost, and agreed value. A consent to settle a loss provision is found in professional liability insurance policies and requires an insurer to seek an insured's consent (approval) prior to settling a claim for a specific amount.

7. Cancellation and Nonrenewal
Cancellation is the termination of an in-force insurance policy, by either the insured or the insurer, prior to the expiration date shown in the policy. Termination may be voluntary, involuntary, or in mutual accordance with provisions contained in the policy.

Nonrenewal is the termination of an insurance policy at its expiration date by not offering a continuation of the existing policy or a replacement policy.

8. Mortgagee Rights
The standard mortgage clause, also known as loss payable clause, is a basis provision of all property policies for real property. Nonmovable property such as houses and other structures is classified as real property, while movable property such as autos, mobile homes, furniture, and equipment is classified as personal property for insurance purposes. In the event of a loss to real property, payment will be made to the insured and the mortgagee as their insurable interest appears. In other words, the mortgagee's right to recover is limited to the amount of the remaining debt, and at no time will the mortgagee receive more than the insurable interest in the property. If an insurance policy is to be cancelled, a mortgagee must receive prior written notice of such cancellation.

When a mortgagee is named in a mortgagee clause attached to a fire or other direct damage policy, the loss reimbursement will be paid to the mortgagee as their interest may appear. The mortgagee's rights of recovery will not be defeated by any act or neglect of the insured. The mortgagee is also given other rights, such as bringing a suit in their own name to recover damages, paying policy premiums, and submitting proof of loss. There is nothing that either the insurer or the insured can do to defeat the position of the mortgagee.

9. Policy Territory
The policy territory defines the location where coverage will be provided.

Sources of Insurability Information
A part of the underwriting process is to determine the insurability of the applicant. Insurers have several resources for gathering information, most of which must be agreed to by the insured in writing before the insurer can use them. The following are some of the sources that may be used in the underwriting process:

Application form;
Motor vehicle records;
Interviews with neighbors, friends and employers;
Inspection of property; and
Inspection of insurance history.
1. Policy Application
The application is a printed form that includes questions about a prospective insured and the desired insurance coverage and limits. It provides the underwriter with information for accepting or rejecting the prospective insured and rating the desired policy. Some policies make the application part of the policy. Misrepresentations in the application can void the policy.

Fair Credit Reporting Act
The Fair Credit Reporting Act established procedures that consumer-reporting agencies must follow in order to ensure that records are confidential, accurate, relevant, and properly used. The law also protects consumers against the circulation of inaccurate or obsolete personal or financial information.

The acceptability of a risk is determined by checking the individual risk against many factors directly related to the risk's potential for loss. Besides these factors, an underwriter will sometimes request additional information about a particular risk from an outside source. These reports generally fall into 2 categories: Consumer Reports and Investigative Consumer Reports. Both reports can only be used by someone with a legitimate business purpose, including insurance underwriting, employment screening, and credit transactions.

Privacy Protection (Gramm-Leach-Bliley)
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act stipulates that in general, an insurance company may not disclose nonpublic personal information to a nonaffiliated third party except for the following reasons:

The insurance company clearly and conspicuously discloses to the consumer in writing that information may be disclosed to a third party;
The consumer is given the opportunity, before the time that information is initially disclosed, to direct that information not be disclosed to the third party; or
The consumer is given an explanation of how the consumer can exercise a nondisclosure option.
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act requires 2 disclosures to a customer (a consumer who has an ongoing financial relationship with a financial institution):

When the customer relationship is established (i.e., a policy is purchased); and
Before disclosing protected information.
The customer must also receive an annual privacy disclosure, and have the right to opt out, or choose not to have their private information shared with other parties.

Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA)
The purpose of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) was to create a temporary federal program that would share the risk of loss from future terrorist attacks with the insurance industry. The act requires that all commercial insurers offer insurance coverage for acts of terrorism. The federal government will then reimburse the insurers for a portion of paid losses for terrorism.

TRIA defines an act of terrorism as an act certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of Homeland Security (as of 2015), and the Attorney General of the United States with the following characteristics:

The act must be violent or dangerous to human life, property, or infrastructure;
The act must have resulted in damage within the United States, to an air carrier as defined in the U.S. Code, to a U.S. flag vessel or other vessel based principally in the U.S. and insured under U.S. regulation, or on the premises of any U.S. mission;
The act must have been committed by someone as part of an effort to coerce the U.S. civilian population, to influence U.S. policy, or to affect the conduct of the U.S. government by coercion; or
The act must produce property and casualty insurance losses in excess of a specified amount.
TRIA applies to commercial property and liability insurance, including excess insurance, workers compensation, and directors and officers insurance. The TRIA statutory definition specifically excludes the following types of insurance:

Federal or private crop insurance; 
Private mortgage insurance or title insurance; 
Financial guaranty insurance issued by monoline insurers; 
Medical malpractice insurance; 
Life and health insurance, including group life insurance; 
Federal flood insurance;
Reinsurance; 
Commercial automobile insurance; 
Burglary and theft insurance; 
Surety insurance;
Professional liability insurance (except for directors and officers liability); or
Farm owners multiple peril insurance.
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) has been renewed and modified multiple times since 2002.

The Reauthorization Act of 2007 amended the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program to

Redefine “an act of terrorism” to eliminate the requirement that the individual or individuals committing a terrorist act be acting on behalf of a foreign person or interest;
Require the Secretary of the Treasury to notify Congress within 15 days of an act of terrorism for which the secretary estimates a loss of more than $100 billion and devise a way to determine the pro rata share of insured losses that exceed $100 billion; and
Require insurers to disclose to policyholders the $100 billion cap on their liability.
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015 established the mandatory recoupment of the federal share through policyholder surcharges at 140% and revised requirements for mandatory repayment form insurers of federal financial assistance provided in connection with all acts of terrorism.

The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act (TRIPRA) in 2019 renewed the program through December 31, 2027. The reauthorization

Requires the Secretary of the Treasury to include in its biennial report to Congress an evaluation of the availability and affordability of terrorism risk insurance, including specifically for places of worship;
Requires the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) to conduct a study on cyberterrorism risks, including an analysis of whether the states’ definition of cyber liability under a property and casualty line of insurance is adequate coverage for an act of cyber terrorism, the potential costs of cyber attacks, the private market’s ability to adequately price cyber risks, and whether the TRIA structure is appropriate for covering cyberterrorism; and
Sets the reimbursement level of covered terrorism losses exceeding the statutorily established deducible at a fixed 80%.

Chapter Recap
This chapter explained the structure of policies, as well as policy provisions and clauses. Let's recap some of the important points:

POLICY PROVISIONS AND CONTRACT LAW

Elements of a Legal Contract

Agreement - offer and acceptance
Consideration - premiums and representations on the part of the insured; payment of claims on the part of the insurer
Competent parties - of legal age, sound mental capacity, and not under the influence of drugs or alcohol
Legal purpose - must be for a lawful reason, not against public policy
Legal Terms

Representations - are statements believed to be true to the best of one's knowledge, but they are not guaranteed to be true
Misrepresentations - untrue statements that could void the contract
Material misrepresentation - is a statement that, if discovered, would alter the underwriting decision of the insurance company
Warranty - is an absolutely true statement that the insurance policy depends on to be valid
Concealment - is the intentional withholding of information of a material fact that is crucial in making a decision and may void a policy
Binders	
Temporary agreement issued by an agent or insurer providing temporary coverage until a policy can be issued
Expire when policy is issued
POLICY STRUCTURE

Policy Components

Declarations - section containing the basic underwriting information, such as the insured's name, address, amount of coverage, premiums and a description of insured locations
Definitions - clarifies the terms used in the policy
Insuring Agreement - establishes the obligation of the insurance company to provide the insurance coverages as stated in the policy
Additional Coverage - provides an additional amount of coverage for specific loss expense, at no additional premium
Conditions - indicates the general rules or procedures that the insurer and insured agree to follow under the terms of the policy
Endorsements - printed addendums to a contract that are used to change the policy's original terms, conditions, or coverages
Exclusions and Policy Limits - perils that are not insured against and what persons are not insured. Policy limits are the maximum amounts an insured may collect or is protected under the terms of the policy
INSURED AND INSURANCE COMPANY

Definition and Duties of the Insured

Insured - anyone who is covered under the policy, whether named or not
Named Insured - individual(s) whose name appears on the policy's declaration
First Named Insured - individual whose name appears first on the policy's declaration
Additional Insureds - individuals or businesses that are not named as insureds on the declaration page, but are protected by the policy
Duties of the named insured in the event of a loss: 

Protect the damaged property from further damage
Prepare an inventory of damaged property
Cooperate with the insurer in settling the loss
Notify the police in the case of a theft loss
Submit to the insurer a signed sworn proof of loss after being requested to do so within a certain time.
COMMON POLICY PROVISIONS

Property and Casualty Policy Provisions

Appraisal - used when there is a disagreement between the insured and the insurer on the value of any property loss
Arbitration - utilized when insurer and insured do not agree on how to settle claim; sent to one or more arbitrators
Cancellation - the termination of an in-force insurance policy, by either the insured or the insurer, prior to the expiration date shown in the policy
Loss settlement - under a professional liability policy, the insurer must gain insured's consent before settling claim
Mortgagee Clause - attached to a policy to protect the interest of the mortgagee in the mortgaged property
Nonrenewal - the termination of an insurance policy at its expiration date by not offering a continuation of the existing policy or a replacement policy
Notice of claim - a form or statement from an insured to an insurer, informing the insurer that events leading to a possible claim have occurred. The form includes how, when, and where the loss took place
Other insurance - defines how the policy will respond if there is other valid insurance written on the same risk
Pro rata - provides for the sharing of loss with other insurance
Proof of loss - a sworn statement that must usually be furnished by the insured to an insurer before any loss under a policy can be paid
SOURCES OF INSURABILITY INFORMATION

Underwriting Process Sources

Application form
Motor vehicle records
Interviews with neighbors, friends and employers
Inspection of property
Inspection of insurance history
FEDERAL ACTS

Fair Credit Reporting Act

Administered by Federal Trade Commissions
Protects consumers from distribution of false or obsolete personal financial information
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act

An insurance company may not disclose nonpublic personal information to a nonaffiliated third party except for certain reasons
Requires 2 disclosures to a customer, when customer relationship is established and before disclosing protected information
Customer must also receive an annual privacy disclosure, have the right to opt out, or choose not to have their private information shared with other parties
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA)

Temporary federal program
Intended to share risk of loss from terrorist attacks with insurers
Insurer must meet deductibles and retentions before government reimbursement

