This chapter will take a practical look at ethics as it pertains to the insurance industry. As you progress through this content, you should be able to explain what behaviors are unethical and imagine what you would do in a similar situation.

This section will recap some of the most important points regarding insurance producer ethics. The information will provide you with a greater understanding of ethical principles and practices; however, it will not appear on the state exam.
Ethics: Principles and Practices
The purpose of this part of the course is to provide the foundation of knowledge and understanding that an individual needs to function ethically in his or her role as an insurance professional. Our concentration will be on the social, professional, and legal aspects of ethics.

It seems that in many news reports that a person reads or listens to these days, some insurance company or insurance agent is receiving negative publicity as a result of bad professional judgment or poor ethical conduct. Bad news usually attracts far more attention than that paid to the legions of insurance agents who perform their daily sales and service tasks in a thoughtful, fair, and ethical manner. Their exemplary work will be discussed in detail.

As you will discover, ethics can be studied on two levels:

Philosophically, where a code of personal ethics helps you gain personal and professional satisfaction; and
Practically, where a code of personal ethics helps you avoid controversy and misunderstandings, which increases your personal efficiency as an agent.
1. Ethics Defined
Ethics is a derivative of the Greek word ethikos, meaning "moral" and ethos, meaning "character." By textbook definition, ethics is "a branch of philosophy that deals with the values of human life in a coherent, systematic, and scientific manner." The Oxford English Dictionary defines ethics as "the department of study concerned with the principles of human duty" and the "rules of conduct recognized in certain associations or departments of human life."

You won't find universal agreement among philosophers as to what, exactly, is ethically right. Immanuel Kant, a German philosopher, believed what is right is based on pure reason. On the other hand, Jeremy Bentham, early 19th-century British philosopher, believed right to be that which will produce the greatest good. Religious philosophers, like St. Thomas Aquinas, say that right is determined by the will of God, and wrong is anything contrary to God's will.

For the purpose of our work, we will use Albert Schweitzers definition of ethics:

Ethics is the name we give to our concern for good behavior. We feel an obligation to consider not only our own personal well-being but also that of others and of human society as a whole.

Dr. Schweitzer, who was a French medical missionary and philosopher, applied this idea of "duty beyond the group" to all humanity. He believes that the ultimate goal of ethics is the fullest measure of justice for all. If we were to distill the philosophy of Dr. Schweitzer into three words, they would be "regard for others."

2. Avoiding Conflicts of Interest
Ethically, an insurance agent who has signed an exclusive contract with the insurer cannot serve two principals at the same time. As a "captive" agent, the agent owes a singular loyalty to that insurer. It would be unethical for that agent to represent two insurance companies selling the same policies. In addition, an agent has the ethical obligation to inform the company about any other related services that the agent provides and receives payment for. An agent who does part-time preparation and filing, for example, or who serves as a consultant to a local business, should inform his or her company of this activity. The insurer can then determine if there is a conflict of interest.

Independent agents also face this issue when they attempt to serve their clients while being contracted to an insurer. Conflicts can be avoided if independent agents follow these guidelines for dual-agency:

The agent represents the insurance company when insurance is being applied for and when it is in the process of being underwritten, in recordkeeping and in claim settlement or other insurer-related activities.
The agent "represents" his or her client only during the process of helping the client select the insurance plan best suited to the client's needs.
Ethics for Insurance Agents
Consider these questions:

Is it ethical for an insurance agent to use for a prospect list the names of individuals who registered for a new home in a supermarket drawing?

Is it ethical for an insurance agent to call himself or herself a financial planner or an estate planning specialist without the proper training, experience, or qualifications?

Is it ethical for an insurance agent to show a prospect a policy illustration without explaining the difference between guaranteed and nonguaranteed benefits?

Of course, the answer to all of these questions is "NO." None of these situations shows proper ethical behavior by an insurance agent. No matter how extreme these examples might seem, they represent ethical responsibilities that an insurance agent is expected to fulfill. An agents four primary ethical responsibilities are to the following:

Insurer;
Policyowners;
General public; and
State.
Each of these areas will be discussed in detail in the following sections, but let's take a brief look at them now.

1. Ethical Responsibilities to the Insurer
The duties of an insurance agent to the insurer are established by the concept of agency. This concept is tangibly represented by the agency contract, which both parties agree to and sign. Within the scope of that contract, the insurance agent owes to the insurer the duties of honesty, good faith, and loyalty. The agent also is obligated to reveal to the insurer all material facts concerning the agency.

In carrying out their duties, the insurance agent is the direct representative of the insurer. The agent's day-to-day activities are a direct reflection on the insurer's image within the community. Should the agent behave unethically, everyone in that community is given to believe that the insurer is also unethical.

2. Ethical Responsibilities to Policyowners
The professional agent can meet their ethical responsibilities to an insured policyowner by filling needs and providing quality service. Service is a primary function of the insurance industry. The way that service is provided often determines the agent's future, since clients are a good source for future sales and references.

In addition to quality service, the agent also owes the policyowner the same degree of loyalty that the agent provides to the insurer. The agent is also charged with the ethical responsibilities of full disclosure, confidentially, timely submission of all applications, and prompt policy delivery.

Selling to Needs
Before an individual becomes a policyowner, they are a prospect. The transition from prospect to policyowner-and ultimately from policyowner to client-comes about when an agent follows two basic rules: sell to needs and service the sale.

In doing so, the agent will also live up to the ethical duties that the agent has to policyowners.

An insurance agent has one principal reason for calling on a prospect: to offer a product or service that will benefit the prospect in some way. An agent must sell the kinds of policies that will best fit the prospect's needs and in amounts that he or she can afford to pay. No one profits-not the insurer, not the agent, and especially not the policyowner-if an individual is coerced or misled into buying too much insurance or purchasing coverage that doesn't suit specific needs.

Fortunately, most agents recognize that selling to fit needs is the best approach to the products and services that they represent. They know that specific types of insurance policies are designed to meet specific needs and that matching policies to needs produces the maximum effect, to the benefit of the policyowner. They also know that needs selling involves problem analysis, action planning, product recommendation, and plan implementation. This requires two important commitments on the agents part:

A commitment to obtain and maintain the knowledge and skills necessary to carry out those tasks; and
A commitment to educating the prospect or client about the products and plans that may be implemented.
Service the Sale
Selling to needs is only part of what an agent must do to meet the ethical responsibilities that the agent owes to a policyholder. Service during and after the sale is just as important. Quality and productivity experts such as W. Edwards Deming and Joseph M. Juran see service as a process in which the customer's wants and needs are anticipated and then satisfied. Most companies today are committed to giving their customers quality service.

In fact, the quality of a company's level of service is perceived as the most important single factor affecting a business unit's performance in the long run. Since 1972, the Strategic Planning Institute (SPI) of Cambridge, Massachusetts, has collected data to determine what corporate strategies influence performance. SPIs studies consistently show that successful companies stress quality service over their competitors.

Service Begins with the Application
In securing coverage for your client, your main responsibility as an agent is to act reasonably under the circumstances. This means that you must also adhere to your ethical responsibilities to the insurer and see that the prospect completes the application accurately and completely.

At this point, your primary responsibility is to the insurer because you are acting as its agent during the application process. Remember that the insurer is relying upon you for full disclosure of all pertinent information regarding the applicant. However, you also have an ethical responsibility to educate prospective insureds to make sure that they fully understand the nature of the application process:

Why the information is required;
How it will be evaluated;
The need for accuracy and honesty in answering all questions; and
The meaning of terms such as "waiver of premium", "automatic premium loan", "nonforfeiture options", and "conditional receipt."
Confidentiality
In the course of qualifying a prospect, completing a financial questionnaire, analyzing needs, or working on an estate or business plan, insurance agents are privy to a client's personal and financial information. Ethics require that the agent respect the sensitive nature of this information and keep it confidential. Personal information about a client should never be released without proper approval from the client.

3. Commitment to Knowledge and Skills
The relationship between the professional insurance agent and the policyowner is usually built upon the policyowner's trust in the agent's knowledge and skills. The policyowner must rely on the agent to provide informed options and trusts that the recommendations for insurance are in the client's best interest.

An agent thus has an obligation to ensure that this trust is justified. This means that an agent has the ethical responsibility to obtain the necessary knowledge and skills needed to evaluate and service the insurance needs of clients. Indeed, the term "professional" implies knowledge and skill. If the agent feels that he or she is not properly trained to perform the needed service, then another professional should be called in to assist.

An agent must also keep his or her base of knowledge and skills current. To this end, the agent must be committed to a program of continuing education. He or she must also stay informed of the latest developments affecting a client's interests. In recent years, there has been an increasing trend toward insurance professionalism. Agents should be competent professionals with a high degree of technical knowledge so that they can match a prospect's need with the appropriate solution.

4. Commitment to Educating the Prospect or Client
Client's trust must be earned, nurtured, and constantly reinforced. The agent who remembers this basic rule is the agent who communicates to his or her client the reasons why a particular insurance policy or program is being recommended and how it will serve the client.

Individuals who understand what a particular insurance plan or policy will do for them are more likely to buy, more likely to be satisfied with their insurance, and more likely to keep their business on the books. This communication and education continues long after the particular policy or program is sold and becomes part of the overall insurance program designed for that client. As noted earlier, the professional agent has established his or her client's insurance program based on needs. These needs should be reviewed annually, supported by explanation and communication of the programs put in place to meet those needs.

5. Ethical Responsibilities to the Public
The insurance agent has more control over the public's attitude toward insurance than sales representatives for most other consumer products. This is because the insurance agent initiates contact with a prospect, determines a prospects need for insurance, recommends a certain product or solution, makes the sales presentation, and finally develops a long-term relationship with after-sale service. In many cases, the prospect has little or no direct contact with the insurance company.

Because this special relationship involves a great deal of contract between the consumer and agent (and because the public generally understands very little about insurance), public perceptions of the industry itself are based on how well or how poorly an agent does his or her job. Thus, the professional insurance agent has two main ethical responsibilities to the public:

To inform the public about insurance with the highest level of professional integrity; and
To strive for an equally high level of professionalism in all public contacts in order to maintain a strong, positive image of the industry.
6. Ethical Responsibilities to the State
The responsibility to regulate the insurance industry is shared by the federal and state governments. However, the states carry the burden of regulating insurance affairs, including the ethical conduct of licensed insurance agents. In some states, the regulation of ethical conduct falls under the category of "marketing practices," while other states refer to it in the context of "unfair trade practices."

Whatever it is called, all states have established a code of ethical standards for insurance agents by defining through laws and regulations what an agent can and cannot do. Although these laws differ from state to state, there are enough similarities to discuss them in general terms. This will be the subject of the next section, in which ethical standards for financial planning and the Investment Advisers Act will also be discussed.

Ethical issues are attracting increasing attention in the business of life insurance. While most states have adopted "Unfair Trade Practices", which defines practices which constitute unfair methods of competition or unfair or deceptive acts or practices, the products offered by life insurance agents have become very complicated. An agent's explanation of the link between their advantages and disadvantages, as well as his/her suggestion of a specific product may determine the financial situation of a client for years.

Also, the complexity of the products makes adequate regulation of insurance companies and their producers extremely difficult. Assessing an agent's activities may be hard, even with detailed regulation. It is impossible to include every possible unethical action in the law; therefore, it is possible for an action to be unethical, even if it is not designated as illegal under the Insurance Code. For these reasons and others, it is necessary in today's climate that producers assume the responsibility for being knowledgeable with regard to the products that they sell and refrain from improper solicitations. No misrepresentation of any kind should be made to an insured or to an insurance company.

7. Underwriting Process
Keeping the Applicant Informed
The underwriting process for an insurance application can be time-consuming. Most insurance companies strive to complete the process within a 21-day period, assuming that there are no delays. Delays can occur whenever an underwriter needs additional information from the applicant and relays that request through the agent, or when a counteroffer, different policy, or different rate is made to the applicant (again through the agent).

An agent's ethical responsibilities to his or her client during the underwriting process center around promptness and policy delivery.

Promptness
An insurance agent needs to ensure that there are no unnecessary delays in the underwriting process. Thus does not mean that the agent has to rush from an applicant's home to the nearest post office to mail an application. It does mean, however, checking the application for accuracy and giving careful thought to it before the application is actually submitted. Many underwriting delays occur simply because the application is not complete or is not clear.

Applications should be submitted as soon as possible. The time frame will vary, of course, depending on the plan of insurance and the complexity of the case. An agent must take these factors into account to act in an efficient manner. If it appears that the underwriting process may take longer than anticipated, the agent should notify the applicant of the delay.

Policy Delivery
Most policies are issued as applied for. In such cases, the agent owes his or her new policyowner prompt delivery of the policy and a review of its features and benefits. Not only does this help solidify the sale, it also represents a step toward making the policyowner a lasting client.

On the other hand, some policies will be rated or rejected. When this happens, the agent has two responsibilities:

To personally review the rating or rejection. Was it medical? Was there an unfavorable medical report? Was something overlooked or not made known to the underwriter? Should additional information be submitted? Is the rating or rejection proper? Should the application be reconsidered? In any event, the agent should have as much information as possible and be able to explain the rating or rejection to the applicant.
Assuming that the rating or rejection was valid, to notify the applicant promptly. To withhold this information is a breach of ethics and could actually harm the applicant and his or her family.
Ethics vs. Values
Ethics is the rightness of what you do. Values are what you believe in—what you hold important.

Values that represent how an individual should behave are considered to be moral values, such as respect, honesty, fairness, and responsibility. Statements around how these values are applied are sometimes called moral or ethical principles.

Many people do not realize the connection between values and ethics. They live each day without recognizing the cumulative impact of their individual actions. Leading an ethical life requires that we establish our values carefully and then work every day to live up to those values.

1. Core Ethical Principles
We build more a principled life with the small choices that we make each day. If we are to lead more ethically-based lives, we must all develop the ability to recognize ethical considerations. We must all become better at recognizing these opportunities to elevate our existence.

These core ethical values can serve as a tool to identify ethical considerations. Whenever honesty, integrity, promise-keeping, fidelity, loyalty, fairness, caring, compassion, respect for others, and personal responsibility come into play, it always involves the consideration of ethics.

Ethical decision-making is a process of evaluating and choosing among alternatives. The goal is to eliminate unethical options and select the best ethical alternative. To consistently make ethical decisions, one must accomplish two fundamental things:

Evaluate alternative courses of conduct on the basis of core ethical principles; and
Choose the action that best advances those principles.
There are many definitions of ethics, but it is generally accepted that any definition would include the following core ethical values and the long-term commitment to their implementation:

Honesty: Is truthful, straightforward, sincere, and candid. It is not deceptive, tricky, or misleading.
Integrity: Is honorable. It has courage of conviction; it stands up for beliefs and puts principle over expediency. It is not hypocritical, weak, or dishonorable.
Promise-keeping: Always strives to keep commitments.
Fidelity/Loyalty: Commits to being reliable and dependable.
Fairness: Strives to be equitable, open, just, and unprejudiced. It does not discriminate on an improper basis. It is not arbitrary or self-serving.
Caring/Compassion: Is considerate, kind, sharing, and charitable. It is not selfish, manipulative, or controlling.
Respects for Others: Respects freedom, dignity, and rights of others.
Personal Responsibility: Considers consequences and accepts responsibility for actions and inaction. It doesn't shift blame or make excuses.
2. Rationalization as a Tool
There are a variety of reasons why we do not take the actions necessary to earn the high ethical ratings that we give ourselves. To make ourselves more comfortable with our actions, we often revert to rationalizations. Have you ever heard yourself say any of the following?

"I'm simply fighting fire with fire."
"If it is legal, it must be okay."
"I was just doing it for you."
"We all do it; it's just how you play the game."
"If it doesn't hurt anyone, it's okay."
"It's necessary to get the order."
"Business is business. I'll be as ethical as the competition allows."
"I deserve it: I have it coming."
Rationalizations make it easier to live with ourselves when we do the things that we want to do, rather than the things that we know we should be doing.

3. The Bottom Line
History is made and lives are changed not by those who follow the crowd, but by those who are prepared to take the ultimate risk and stand up for what is right.

It is always a challenge to do the right thing in a competitive environment. But each time we make a decision to stand for what is right, even if it costs us something, we reinforce our own moral character and influence others.

We do not develop that ability overnight. It is developed in small steps as we do the right thing each day. Unfortunately, many of us do not even recognize the opportunities that exist.

There are 4 basic principles of a highly-ethical individual:

The individual is at ease when interacting with diverse customers.
The individual is obsessed with fairness. The individual's ground rules emphasize that the other persons interests count as much as his/her own.
The individual assumes personal responsibility for his/her actions, and he/she is responsible for himself/herself first and then to his/her organization.
The individual sees his/her activities in terms of purpose. This method of viewing an individual's activities is highly valued by the members of the industry or organization. Purpose ties the individual to the organization--and the organization to the environment.
The following are characteristics of a highly-ethical organization or industry:

There exists a clear vision and picture of integrity throughout the industry.
The vision is owned and embodied by top management in the industry, over time.
The reward system is aligned with the vision of integrity.
Policies and practices of the industry are aligned with the vision - no mixed messages.
It is understood that every significant decision has ethical value dimensions.
Everyone in the industry is expected to work through conflicting value perspectives.
4. The Benefit of Applying Ethics
There are many obvious moral benefits to adhering to ethical standards, but there are other benefits of ensuring that ethics are followed in the industry and in the workplace:

Attention to business ethics has substantially improved society. A number of decades ago, children in our country worked 16-hour days. Workers limbs were literally torn off, and disabled workers were condemned to poverty and often starvation. Conglomerates controlled some markets to ensure that prices were fixed and small businesses were choked out. Price-fixing crippled normal market forces. Employees were terminated based upon personalities. Influence was applied through intimidation and harassment.

Then society reacted and demanded that businesses place a higher value on fairness and equal rights. Antitrust laws were instituted. Government agencies were established. Unions were organized. Laws and regulations were established. Ethics programs help to maintain a moral course in turbulent times.

Attention to business ethics is critical during times of fundamental change. At such times, there is often no clear moral compass to guide leaders through complex conflicts about what is right or wrong.

Continuing attention to ethics in the workplace sensitizes leaders and staff to acting consistently.

Ethical standards support individual growth.

Attention to ethics in the industry helps an agent to face realities, both good and bad, in the industry and within himself. In this regard, an agent may feel full of confidence and can admit and deal with whatever comes his way.

Ethics programs are a form of insurance; they help to ensure that policies and practices are legal and can stand the test of public or shareholder scrutiny.

There is an increasing number of lawsuits in regard to the effects of products and services on the consumer. Attention to ethics ensures highly ethical policies and procedures in the workplace. Analysts believe that it is far better to incur the cost of mechanisms to ensure ethical practices now, rather than to incur the costs of litigation later.

Ethical standards help to avoid criminal acts of omission and can lower fines.

Ethics standards, such as an insurance agent's code of ethics, tend to detect ethical issues and violations early on, so they can be addressed. In some cases, when an organization is aware of an actual or potential violation and does not report it to the appropriate authorities, it can be considered a criminal act.

Ethical guidelines adopted on an industry-wide basis potentially decrease fines if an organization or individual has clearly made an effort to operate ethically.

Ethical standards help to manage values.

Ethics programs identify preferred values and ensure that the individuals behavior is aligned with those values. This effort includes recording the values, developing policies and procedures to align behavior with preferred standards, and then training personnel about the policies and procedures. Ethical standards are highly useful for managing strategies, such as expanding market shares, reducing costs, and managing diversity.

Ethical standards promote a strong public image.

Attention to ethics is also a strong public relations tool. Admittedly, managing ethics should not be done primarily to enhance public relations. But the fact that an organization regularly gives attention to ethics can portray a strong, positive image to the public.

People see those organizations as valuing people more than profit, as striving to operate with the utmost integrity and honor. Aligning behavior with values is critical to effective marketing and public relations programs.

Here's the bottom line: Applying ethical standards legitimizes managerial actions, strengthens the coherence and balance of the industry, improves trust in the relationship between individuals and groups, and supports greater consistency in the standards and qualities of products.

